Lucian [2k]: hi
Chris: This extension is not played anymore because of the variation.
Chris: This move looks like a mistake. If white manages to attack this stone, the thickness in the bottom right starts working.
Chris: The safetymove is premature. White has to avoid being shut in and make the thickness to the right work.
Chris: Now blacks attachment is not a liability anymore. White gets pressed low and the thickness loses power.
Chris: Since white is alive in the corner, tenuki would be correct. Pushing on the 2nd line is an emergency measure that should be only played in real emergencies ;)  I would play A to limit the influence black has built.
I thought this corner turned out well for black. White didn't get much territory, and black got nice influence.
Chris: Good move by black. Since the A group is super strong and rich in eyeshape, Black could extend even further to invite an invasion, depending on the players style.
Chris: This move seems to be a bit premature, as it helps black build more influence. As White I would have gone for A or B.
Is this the best move in this situation?  Chris: If you are confident that the top right black group will live (locally, not by running away!) this is the best move.
Chris: This move leaves aji to connect with the A-B combo. Since black lives locally if white kosumi, white would make better shape by just jumping.
Chris: If Black doesnt want to cut at A, the pushes were ajikeshi.
Chris: White got an OK result. It depends now on how well whites lump of stones can be attacked.
Chris: Too early. I guess Black regarded this as a forcing move to attack Whites centre more strongly. But since this white group is also not 100% alive, it can be considered aji keshi. When leaning-attacking make sure you lean on a strong group, not a weak one.
Chris: Maybe a bit further away leaves white with less options.
Chris: I dont understand this move. It is open skirted at A, Black could also do the B-C combo.
Chris: I have the feeling Black would get in trouble after A.
Chris: The entire sequence that follows looks very random and unecessarily complicated.
Chris: White gets to this move first. This is a difference of maybe 20 points.
Chris: Very nicely exploited whites weaknesses.
Chris: Overplay.
Chris: I dont understand this peep.
Chris: Black should answer.
Lucian [2k]: thanks corona [2k]: thx
::CC::  Not the best move  closing off the corner with A (which is a forcing move..) or invading with B are both better options..  becase the triangled stone is low... the upper side is not a big place to play
white gets a huge point
::CC::  very slow... A, B or tenuki @ C  your stones up there are stronger than they look
Was this a good move or i should have played something else?  i wasnt sure what to play  ::CC::  this looks ok -- forms a big moyo and gets ready for an invasion at A or B -- i think its fine
Was p10 really a good move?  ::CC:: not the best -- see variations--
maybe think about more solid move...  see var
Not sure what i should have played here.
ChemBoy613 [-]: ponnuki amazing for white
yithril [2d]: really?
takayanagi [5d]: capturing a ponnuki worth about 39.5 points
yithril [2d]: doesn't seem like a functional ponnuki
Magnusjen [8k]: wreaking possible black points
there are better moves see var
I think i should have played g12 to avoid the cut
Magnusjen [8k]: i don't wanna close my eyes
Magnusjen [8k]: why make ko sensei ?
This ponnuki was bad :(
::CC:: not the bes here
pretty good deal for black
very necessary
::CC:: very good for black
::CC:: think you could do bigger damage with amove at A
A is bigger
gote
see var...
NICE luck out
Seeing white´s thikness i wanted to do something to neutralize it, but I think this invasion came sort of spineless.This may be OK as a forcing move - but really it would have been much better just to have invaded at the 3,3 point (A)
I try to do something lightly, so as not to be attacked so hard.
White F10 would have completly sourronded and therefore killed the whole group. So I was lucky with this mistake - I made up my mind about this mistaken invasion.  Agreed  - white must have be under the delusion that you had to answert at G8 -   Again - you should have invaded at C3   Alternatively you could have reinforced you own top right corner instead
I escaped but neither got some territory nor influence - white therefore the whole left side.  Most important - you ended in gote  - allowing white to invade at r17
Often I have read about this double hane as a strong move but it turned out rather clumsy, for the ponuki white got could hardly be stopped.
A is the vital point in this shape - white should play there now - if he doesn't then black plays there and gets a large right side territory - see variations
Maybe bL12 might turn out to be better, but leaving the left side open doesnt feels good.  The top left is only a few points - O16 is still the best play here  By defending on the left you are squeezing white INTO your right side rather than pushing him away from it..
here white exploited the weakness i have left by blocking him at q12 - i couldnt see a better way to stop his group.
I had a look at a few variations  here - looks like white may be able to kill the black invasion
The presence of the two triangled stones creates the Ko  that happened later
Of course this Ko was always waiting to happen!
W should capture the b corner here
W can just capture the black stones!
OOps
I was afraid of a white squeeze at m13 but I think i defended correctly
This kind of move usually stands no chance against a reasonable defence. It is actually very bad manners to play this type of move UNLESS you have it all worked out in advance. White got it badly wrong here but that doesn't excuse you for playing it.
Ugh - just play b7  - Black has no room to live - this invasion was silly
Even now b should not live - see variation
This is bad - just capture thec11 stone
WHAT is this all about - w does not even need to answer this move!
What ARE you trying to do - this kind of play is frankly rude to your opponent
schlip [2d]: hi
amnesia [2k]: hi
Since white left this group without finishing the joseki, you have the right idea to attack it.  This move is a good followup after the joseki, when white has made a base.  Since white didn;t make a base it is more important now to remove the base as in the variation.  If this group is not settled you can make a lot of points and thickness by chasing it.
The corner is big, and once white plays in the corner he is settled. I prefer to take the corner and chase white into the center.  Usually when you surround a weak group your goal is to make thickness in sente.  You surround him, he lives, and you take sente to use your outside thickness. In this game, you answer in the corner, so your surrounding mvoe is not sente.  The wall you make is weak since he can cut through it later when the ladder works.
This move is good when you have a stone arounf K3 or K4.  Since you don't, a pincer is better.  When you ahve a stone around R10, the tight pincer is best since it will work well with your wall after white goes into the corner.
Here you try too hard to get both sides.  This move does not attack strongly since it gives white room for a small extension. White can reduce your right side because you didn't jump on the right.  If you make the kick move at P3, you have to continue with the jump on the right edge.  if you are unhappy with white extending on the lower side, then don't start with P3.  Make a pincer instead.  The pincer looks good beacuse you have a stone on the right side already, so if white goes into the corner your wall will work well.
Now white is settled with a thick group and took away most of the corner territory.  This is a great result for white.  In a handicap game white's goal is usually to make thickness without giving much territory so he can use his superior fighting skills.
This is a good reducing move.  You should look at answering to the right, or capping.  Answering is simple and gives you a lot of secure territory, and white doesn't get a very solid wall. Answering is probably fine for a handicap game.  In an even game I think black should cap and start a running fight.  If black gets some stones in the center he can play strongly on the left side.
The two marked stones are not important since they are not cutting anything.  Capturing them is a small endgame play, so of course white will not answer this move.  Letting white break up the right side is much, much bigger.
This move is too easy for white.  The right side goes away and you still have several cutting points.  You can defend the right first with a peep.
Small.  White should strengthen his right side group or play on the top.
Good.  you can recover now by attacking white strongly.
You are thick above, and thin below, so you should think about moves closer to bottom side.  The general strategy is to play near your weaker stones and away from your stronger stones when attacking.
bad move, right?  Yes.  You have already destroyed the potential eye here, so the most important thing is to prevent white from connecting.  It's hard to make a strong attack now because of your previous move at N10.  Your stone at O6 is too weak.
i forgot he connects! amnesia in action :)  your cutting stones are really important to keep the attack going. He can only make one eye by playing at S13, so want to continue to chase him.  this move must be at M6.
Good.  You are making good use of the wall you made on the right by making him run toward it.
You have to answer this move to keep the pressure up.  If you play H9 white will answer and you can still play at D12.  Your group is not alive yet, so it's important to keep access to the center.  You want to keep up a one-sided attack against the group at C6.  You don't want to give any change to counterattack you C9 group.
This is too small.  If you can make a good wall below, you want to come in at c14 and capture this stone on a large scale.
This is really bad.  When white captures he will live in sente and you can only make a very small capture.  Yuor thickness here is wasted making just a few oints of territory.
Now white is alive and your thickness on the right is wasted. You should answer this move to maintain yuor center thickness.
This is small.
you have to answer on the left.  Once you play C14 you can't abandon it.  A general rule is that you can abandon stones that are enar enemy strength, but you have to save stones near weak enemy groups. when yuo are attacking.  In this game you gave up single stones during attacks at P3, G8, and now C14.  All were big losses.
Yo need to answer the last move.  You give up way too much on the left otherwise.
If your plan is to let white capture C14, it's better not to play it at all.
at this stage, white has almost no territory, except for the top right, so black feels comfortable.  what do you say?  Black still has a good game.  Black is ahead on territory and thickness is about even.  Black missed a chance to wrap up the game by giving up G8, but shold still win.  Notice that since white captured C14, white is stong enough here to ignore this move.
I would prefer not to give up a stone.
d3 better, right?  Yes.  Generally it's better to make a solid connection unless you have a good reason not to, like to make eye shape.
Good idea to increase black's territory.
Again you don't answer white's contact play.  It's better to answer.
Again I wold prefer the solid conenction at g15
Do these forcing moves really help you?  They reduce your liberties, adn remove ko threats you might want later.
Now white is ahead.  Black lost a lot of points in the lower left. and upper center.  Remember that you let white live so yuo could make a small capture of D10, but now D10 has escaped, so you ended up gaining nothing.
Very small.
Hello
chunholee [2k]: hi,thx u 2
here or A?  Either is fine, it depends on your strategy.  If you like  fighting more, A would be preferred, but for big moyo  games, black 5 is usualy played.
Here, I think a tight pincer is too severe.  In some cases, it  could work, but here it puts white at a disadvantage if  black plays according to the variation.   I would prefer a move at A, or maybe B. (A works better  with the marked stones.)
Was this a good move?  It was a fine move; I'm surprised white played at B4  instead of G5 though :)
Who did this result favour? This is fairly even for both sides, but I think black is a little  better off because white's wall is so far from his single  stone at D16 and black can later attack with A.
A?  I think black 15 is right. Were black to play at A, though it  is good...  This way, black limits the amount of territory white can  build on the left side by a little andallows for black to make  sabaki, either on the side or in the corner, more easily, as  in the game
Is it too early to play A?  It's very tempting since it would split white's group into  two.  However, I might play around B first then play at A. This is because if white plays somewhere around C to  prevent the cut at A from being so effective, black  creates a extremely large moyo with D or a lot of territory  with E
I think perhaps this move should be at A since it seems to  create a more "pure and simple" game for black  But in no way is this a bad move; it's very good; just I  prefer to start large scale fights becasue I tend to make  one mistake and totally get crushed :(  (I'm kind of digressing here, but I bought this really good  book by Takao Shinji called "Pure and Simple:  Takao's  Astute Use of Brute Force".  Though it is a little  advanced, it helped a LOT with my style.  You might like  it.)
Was it a good plan sacrificing the stone?  Yes, it was very smart!  Especially since this move  threatens to connect to your lone stone.
Good move!  Many people would be tempted to play a  more loose move, but this move is very good, probably  honte.
Now is it the right timing?  I think it's a good move to play.  It just seems hard to  decide between this and building a moyo at the bottom  first, like in the variation, which I would have been  tempted to play.
Was this unnecessary?  No, white would definitely respond, so it's not horrible, it  just feels aji keshi to me since white's group gets stronger  at the expense on just one point.  Perhaps A instead (for a  local play, black would keep sente and you could still  play this move later)?
How big is this move?  It's VERY big since black is connected and because of  the weakness it leaves for white at the marked spot; if  white doesn't block before you decide to cut, black could  cut and do a good bit of damage.  Also the stones are more awkward now.
Was this attack good enough?  Defintely, had you attacked from elsewhere, white could  play one of these variations.
Could White be killed?  Theoretically, no, but with his ocassional weird plays,  sometimes I wonder:)
W got sealed in.Was Black favoured here?  YES!!! I wish I knew what white was thinking when he let  black seal him in!  This definitely cost him the game.
Was this an overplay?  I think the only reason it is an overplay now is because it's  too early to play comfortably.  First, I would play around A  since white would be forced to play around B prevent his  stones from being attacked there.
I thought that simply destroying White's territory was  enough, so I didn't save the three stones.
Was this unnecessary?  No, it was a really good move; one of the honte I nearly  miss each time :)
I didn't see this move :( Ouch :(   I thought about that too until I saw that it lead to that. I can tell that you're very good and will improve a lot by  your comment, so I'm positive you saw the right move  here. (In the small chance you didn't, it'd be at A.)
I think this was a good move.Also, was there any way to  prevent W from being alive? Wow, that's a great move. I'm glad I saw it too...... :) At this point, white is dead only because you end up in  gote. Though, at this point, white is not yet alive.
Naturally, this seems right, but maybe if you try what I try  to do before a move, you might get even stronger. I say to myself, "This is very good, but is there a tesuji?" Indeed, thanks to the marked stone, there is.
I don't like this because now a play at A would end in  gote for black, after this exchange.
Was this tenuki not suitable? No, since white had that tesuji.  Still, you could defend  and get sente through this sequence.
I didn't see This move  :(
phew, still alive :) yay :)
Please comment on my yose and tell me the right  sequence.Lastly, see questions at the end of the game About that... I'll try to, but playing THE perfect endgame is very  difficult, even for pros.
chunholee [2k]: ?
Thanks for the review! Here are some questions: 1.What do I need to improve on? 2.How to improve? Thanks!
Hi, I have won this game but I realize I've done some mistakes and could be really bigger sometimes. Please comment it. :) Thanks in advance.
i suppose this was a wrong move... cause this stones mekes a good base for pincering.  what do you think?  am> I do not like this move because black can extend from is 2 stones while pincing white. I would'nt like a black move on 'A' which would make a strong position for black, so your idea to approach the corner seems good. But, instead of a white low approach which will be difficult for living or escaping, I prefer a move on 'A' to reduce black moyo and to escape more easily.
am> Ok, you choose to escape, but black can make lot of profit (see variation)
am> strange move : Black gains nothing white is strenghtened. He should have played 'A'.
am> I would prefer A to try to make some eye shape. But I think your move is ok as it put pressure on black on the right.
am> You played 'A' and it's ok. But you should think about some other sequences
am> ok
am> I would prefer a move around A to make some eye shape.
am> ok, but beware that your big group is still floating. But stabilising it is not urgent, so your move is the good one.
a modification of a standart joseki, but i am not sure if this move was right because of a wrong direction (square)  Please leave a comment  am> It would be joseki without squared stone but it's still playable and I think it's still joseki ;-)
seems to be a mistake.. not joseki move  am> no, it's good move. Black split white and it will be hard for you now.
am> R17 is joseki. M16 is playable but it will be complicated.
am> I personnaly don't like this.
am> very bad shape for black.
am> I think you should hane on A
not the best move i suppose. maybe j17 is better  am> right. You created a cutting point.
am> You played a big move, but 'A' is urgent as it split black.
am> 'A' is better
am> very bad move from black.
am> you have a lot of luck in that sequence
am> I prefer 'A' or 'B'.
am> you're again lucky here. A more agressive opponent would have put you in troubles.
i see it's a critical cut =(  am> no, it's ok. If black cut, you catch the stone.
am> better here
am> not very effective... Black should do something around 'A' to reduce your moyo.
am> I don't think you have to protect because you're very strong. Playing A, B or C is bigger.
am> big cut here....
am> you should protect your corner. Triangles stones are weak now.
am> A move at 'A' makes more territory, but you have an urgent move before to protect your triangles stones.
am> too submissive. Imagine black has played B16 and white C17... would he played C16 after ? Of course no. So this is a very bad move.
am> good  I stop my comment here.  It was a bit difficult to comment that game because of the style you both played : lot of fights.
In this game I did not play too badly apart from some slack moves, but I still lost. I often seem to loose early on (around move 50 -100) when i am still setting out my frameworks
hmmm, not bad, but maybe slow?
good
too small
This is pushing from the wrong direction
This move is big mistake here
wow, black is feeling suicidal!
This move is a big mistake.
i don't like the way you hurt your head here.
This shape is very bad shape for White.
this is overplay, too many cutting points now
big mistake
This result is horrible for white Hard game now.
now he gets R10, this is big. His UR is starting to be big territory
This shape again, not good for White  Read http://senseis.xmp.net/?HaneAtTheHeadOfTwoStones and http://senseis.xmp.net/?HaengMaTutorialForBeginners  It will help you understand why this shape is bad.
seems a bit overly optimistic, black has so many stones there.
csh: I wanted to reduce White's potential on the left.  * This is an okay move although...
csh: This seemed like the correct side to approach from. It protects the left corner, and crowds the white group a little bit.  * Yes it is the correct side to approach from.
csh: I wasn't worried about my stone yet. I wanted to treat it as a light move, so I didn't think I needed to play on the left yet. I was keeping 'A' in reserve to split the left side. Is this okay?
csh: Seemed like the biggest move.
csh: I wasn't sure how to respond. Seemed the kick was the best sequence.  * I think so too.
csh: I sort of expected this.
csh: I decided to let White live in exchange for a large lower right corner.
* The White group is alive the thick which is bad for Black.
csh: Seemed better to protect here instead of 'A,' even though the relation of the marked stones looks odd.
csh: Is this the right timing? I wanted to probe and see how White would respond, then either take the corner or split the lefthand side.  * I still think B10 is a better move.
csh: I split the left, but perhaps playing out the corner first would be better. See the variation.  * Compared to B10, this move poses little threat to the C6 group.
White played here, and suddenly my splitting attack does nothing. The lower group should live if he attaches at 'a.'
csh: I am very bad at running out with weak groups. It's probably the part of the middlegame that I have the most problems with. I actually played the marked stone to get this type of game on purpose, to help me practice.
csh: Since my marked stones couldn't be surrounded with one move, I thought the extension was bigger than moving the marked stones out tot the middle. The extension also indirectly helps the marked stones.
csh: I have no idea how to respond to this move. This is the group that I had problems running out. Any comments about better moves or better shape would be greatly appreciated.
csh: I considered 'A,' but it seemed slow. This move invites white 'B.'
csh: I also considered connecting at 'A,' but I don't know which is better.
* H13 might be better.
csh: I wanted to complete the shape at 'A,', but I also felt like I needed to reduce White's moyo before the left got too big.
* Secondly, I can't see which is better out of A and B. Black should probably tenuki.
csh: White said later that this was a bad sequence, because it took away the sente move at 'A' for Black.  * Black doesn't gain anything from this sequence.
csh: Now I'm in trouble. I can't find a good move to make shape here.
csh: I played this, looking to bend around the end of the white group at 'A' or so.
csh: But White just punishes my shape.
csh: Ugh.  * White just made the Black group safe and strong while getting nothing IMO.
csh: I read the double-hane as being the only playable variation.
csh: I played this way, looking to attack the group on the right and then turn my attention to the left. See the variation.
csh: I was trying to pressure the white group, and start to make territory in the middle of the board. White suggested that I cut directly at 'A' instead.  * I wouldn't cut in that way unless in desparate situation.
* P2 is also very big.
csh: We ran out of time and had to adjourn the game. I did have some questions, though:  1) What are the biggest endgame moves? I labeled some of the moves I was considering for Black. I thought that 'A' and 'C' were the biggest.  * A & C are the biggest moves but Black can only get one of them. A compromise is the C9, C8, H4 sequence.  2) Do you agree with my assessment that Black is slightly ahead?  * Black is way ahead.  3) What other comments do you have about the game?  * Territory and reading are important.  * Every time before making a move, think about this: can I gain anything (more points, better shape, severe threat to the opposition's group etc.) from this move? For example, the 57-62 sequence is bad because White does not gain anything at the end.  * A shape is good only if it can result in more points.  Thanks in advance for the review.  Chris
[Now I wasn't sure how to respond here, looking back,I should've attack that lone stone around A, since my two stones down are strong enough atm. Instead I played the way I did, ending up in gote]  M: Actually, i prefer to play from below. I also asked some stronger players and most voted for playing from below how you did it in the game. Since the white stone is on the 4th line he is light anyway. I will comment about that later again.
M: This move is okay but i wouldn't play it, but i think, that is a matter of style.
Actually that white move is... halfbaken. Extending from a 3-3 stone is usually uncommon and regarded as uneffective, and the stone is not close enough to pressure the corner (should be on A/B then) Still, the black top right corner is maybe alive, but already nearly surrounded. One should consider this in his further moves
M: Another weird move. Trying to build some kind of moyo with an 3-3-opening has usually no chance for success.
[I felt it was about time to bug those opened stones ] M: First of all, this splitting move is the wrong one in this shape. This shape (triangled) occurs quite often, so you should better look at some variations here. As in the game, with that move you can hardly expect a good result. Further comments why this attack was too early in the variations.
M: Now this is a serious direction mistake. This way, you get some thickness towards the triangled direction, but give away a lot of territory and the corner. You also help white to settle his stones now.
[And of course, as expected, now I was confused. After some thought I chose to play on A, because otherwise W would lock me in corner.] M: Looks already pretty terrible for black. But when you want to keep the Corner, just play at at B
M: if you want to play here, this is still the wrong move. A would be atari for white and white could connect there all the time
[this felt big enough and necesary]  M: it is big, and probably necessary, but giving white that one stone there is painful. Now white is superstrong, blacks stone in the center look kinda lostand blacks attack completly failed.
[Here I got seriously scared of invasion at A, so I defended. Luckily for me, my oponent took it as forcing move a responded (which I think was not necesary). Thinking about that now, there propably wasnt much to be afraid of.]  M: there is nothing serious, you are right, but it was sente ;)
[Since it was quite obvious I was lacking out a lot, I attacked. I chose this side, because attack on A or B would only help W to strenghen his right side, while slowly overconcentrating my stones on bottom. Thinking about it now, i may have been fine - viz variation]  M: First of all, there is no real attack here. It is just an approach, and it takes about 4 moves to really kill a single 4-4-Stone. So best you can epect is a share. Usually an attack should give the attacker a positive result while  a corner approach shares evenly. At the moment there is nothing of white you could attack severly, so approaching the bottmleft corner is still the biggest move on the board. But as you noticed yourself, the direction was wrong.
M: you invites the pincer (and extension from the top), here it comes. Correct play by white
M: black might play at A or B, but there are dozens of josekivariations. Since usually at your level both don't know that kind of joseki, you can play them, when you have a good intuition about such moves and their followups
[I was prpared to give up on left side in exchange for the right. So basicaly I am trying to do the same thing as in previous variation, only with much worse result]  M: yes, but after approach from this side, i is hard to get a good result
Since W extended, it was time to live on the left
[instead of here, would be better to extend at A?] M : yes, you would develop your moyo much faster
[Wrong direction?]  M: yes ;) you force your opponent in your moyo
[Is this running weak or necesary?] M: it is dangerous, because now you center group is eyeless and weak, but if you defend it, it is the same like resigning. you are behind, when you would let white enter your moyo all hope is lost
[This would propably be stupid move, maybe extending the lone stone would be just fine, but then invasion on that point would make it very difficult for me to survive]  M: it is the shape move and okay. The question is, why you played the other move before. when you are now afraid of it. That white  answer was expectable.
M: too passive
[I still thought that if I could ruin whites points on center, the game would be close enough] M: I think, white has won already, but yeah, there is a small chance still.
[this was big and very painful. since I wasnt sure how to respond here, i bent to survive] M: One move ago, you said, you think, you ar ebehind, but if you get the initiative, you can probably win ;) No risk, no chance
M: there will be not that many points in the center, because white can jump in there from the other side at any time
M: now the bottom left corner could be killed by white at any time (see variation when C8 was played)
[This move was so dumb, I thought about kicking myslef right afret playing it.] M: yep, cutting two alive groups doesn't do much ^^ White might kill some black stones now, but that is small compared to other yose-points
[Game over. I propably lost sooner, but now the result was more than obvious even to me. We decided to keep playing to see how much difference it will eventualy make in order to choose proper handicap next time.]
M: bottom left is still killable
M: :( that was sente for you alle the time, and kinda big in points, AND now it is even sente for your opponent...
[This move was played sooner, I just forgot to write it in.]
M: Okay... Final comment  Overall i think, your opponent was some stones stronger. I just marked the 4 mainmistakes of that game.  (1) The hasty attack with the still open corner on the wrong point.  (2) The bad continuation from that, instead of cutting (3) The wrong side for the approach in the lower left.  (4) The missing resistence to whites attack (and as you know now, that just made everything worse instead of safer)  Most of your mistakes were part of 3 categories:  A) your mind often shifted, you played a move, your opponent played the obvious response and suddendly you changed your plan and made a completly different move, making your first move and the white counter looking bad (e.g. N9 and M11) B) lacking sense of shape - that is just training, best way to study is to watch stronger players (like KGS 5d+ or professionals play, then usually the understanding for good shape comes by itself (e.g J15) C) your positional judgement had no influence in your moves - from your comments, it looked like you noticed when you were behind etc. But if you do so, you should also think, what kind of consequences that has. Means, when being behind, also take some risks, try something etc. When you are ahead, play safe, etc. (e.g. #4)
Hello! In this game I play white and win by 3,5 points. I think, that opening was bad for me and I had really big problems with black upper-left moyo. So, I'll be grateful for any advice about my opening. Show me please, where I loose big or vital points in development. Where was better direction of play?  Of course, any other comments are appreciated! Thank You! FR  P.S. Sorry for my bad english
TH: Hello, I'm Tom Harrison (hotcoffee) and I'll do my best to review this game. Some of your questions are quite difficult for me to give absolute answers to, but I hope the suggestions I make are helpful.  TH: Final summary. There are 5 major points in the game that you should pay careful attention to:  You punished black for an early mistake in joseki which should have left you ahead, but need to remember the value of connecting your groups.   You need to apply the following proverb to your game: Do not play near thickness (eg. move 24 and 18)  You lost many points with the sequence beginning at move 24 - you should not have let black into your corner.  At move 20 you mis-read the direction of play - read the analysis at move 19 carefully.  When invading an opponent's moyo, play lightly and sacrifice stones if it helps you escape or live.  I hope this review has been helpful. Good Luck!
TH: I felt this move was slightly unusual. I do not think the move is bad, but it may be more normal at A, B or C. (see variations)
Black's next move is a mistake, which you punish. See the variation for the correct move.
FR: what do You think about E2? Is ti better to move around b10 or even tenuki?  TH: E2? I'm not sure what you mean, unless it is a mis-type for E3.  The move you just played is good. This is an immediate threat to kill Black's corner stones, and it firmly separates the D4 stones. Black has failed.  Perhaps tenuki would be a good idea for black now - to try to fight back elsewhere.
TH: Black lives with a tiny group, and white has sente. You asked where you lost vital points or misread direction of play.  I think your *next* move was a mistake - I'm not sure, but it looks wrong to me.  Try to work out what move I'd play - black has three safe groups, white has one safe group and two groups that each are *almost* very strong. Another thing to consider is that after joseki, each player is usually even - the player that gains in immediate territory usually gives influence to the other player... black made a mistake here, so what has white gained?
TH: What about A instead?  It took me a long time to think about this one. - I will mention it many times throughout the game; not to be mean, but to point out how much more efficient a stone here would have been. It is just one mistake, but it will haunt you.  The two black stones are almost dead here. It's unlikely that black's next moves will use thier aji... But at some point, a fight *could* break out in the centre, or on the left. It might be important to catch the two black stones so you can connect.  These comments continue in the variation.
FR: I always have problems playing against low chinese.  In the game I choose'd between shimari (A), extension (B) and kakari (C or D). Which of this moves better? Is there any other good points?  TH: A is perhaps a "big" move. It encloses a corner and scores some territory. Unfortunately it places no pressure on black at all - it even helps. There is a very similar (slightly smaller) move at E16, so A is not terribly urgent.  B is a calm extension. quite nice, but (despite not having a stone at E6, yet) perhaps it would be better at Q10, because the strength on the other side of the board could be used to co-ordinate some sort of framework... then again, J3 is a low stone too, so perhaps that strategy would not work.  I like C. It is the best move you have suggested, and I don't think there are better moves available.  Why? Because it is a long extension from your ideal corner and is a good place for either player on the right hand side.  (Make sure you have read the variation regarding E6. In this position E6 is less important, as J3 does some of it's job.)
TH: So far every stone you have placed is below the centre line. Black will punish you now by taking the biggest point on the board - one that you just made more valuable with your last move.
TH: This is a good move. Black an white both wanted this point so it is worth double what it would be if only one player wanted it. Black now has the beginning of a two wing formation in the top right.
FR: Isn't it to slow?  TH: You've just fallen behind, and this move is big, but does nothing to make Black worry. It is too passive, and too slow.  This move has become important. You do not want black to finish his framework. See the variation.
TH: Now... Black can extend in two directions, so this is a sensible invasion.  Black has no room to extend to the left. The main points black is aiming at are A and B.  White's proper response is to take one of these options away. (See variations)
TH: Small. Black can push further under, and can also still escape. Better at A.
TH: wrong side. Better at A or B. You lose all the benefit out the R4 and P4 stones now.
TH: Perhaps you made this shape because you know a "ponnuki is strong and worth points".  This is not a ponnuki - ponnuki are made in the opening by capturing a stone. Because you capture a stone it takes only 3 moves to make. You made this in 4 moves, and it has no influence over the board.
FR: Was B9 or B10 better?  TH: I prefer B10. It has more spirit... but these stones are so weak, you may be best off capturing at E6.  C9 is such a short extension that it is hardly worth making. You would not need to extend if you had a stone at E6.
TH: Ouch. Seems like you lost a lot of moves (J3, C9) before making this one.
FR: now it was really hard for me to decide, how to invade black's moyo.  TH: I think the best move is still E16. This corner is incomplete and you can split black's moyo slightly.  Other points to consider are B (which you played), C (which allows an extension either into the corner or along the side) and D - which takes some territory for sure but may be a little too good for black right now.  E is a key point that would be useful if the stone at P37 was white.  You are too far behind on territory for E to be a sensible move for white right now.
TH: White has many ways (ABCD) to run. A good invasion.
FR: Is L17 instead of o16 playeble?  TH: Certainly. You are invading a strong moyo. You must play lightly and sacrifice stones whenever you can get an advantage by doing so. See variation.
TH: You become heavy, and allow black to take away your ideal extension.
TH: Good. Now you have no other choice but to run like this.
TH: But black's corner is as good as sealed - you have lost the opportunity to invade R17. This is the disadvantage compared to L17 at move 40.
TH: I'm not sure about this. How about getting some space with L15 instead?
TH: you are not safe and need to run to the centre with A.
TH: The knight's move makes you weaker.  Run with the one step jump or diagonal move.  Almost never run with the knight's move. It is easily cut.
TH: Black let you off easily. You can still get to the centre. Your marked stones may allow you to extend as far as A, B or C.  You can not make life at the top - there is not enough space.
TH: One eye.
TH: Black takes the pressure off you. Better for him to play at A, if he is worried about connecting his lower stones.
TH: Overplay. You need to run still.
TH: This move puts severe pressure on the marked stones.  They need to run or you could lost the whole group.
TH: This move is big, but very gote. You need to think about urgent plays.
FR: now white O17 look's in trouble. Any ideas about saving it?  TH: Black should not let you have more than one eye at the top. Therefore you have to run.
TH: Black can probably kill with A.
TH: This peep does not help yet. Leave it for later. Play A instead.
TH: Black is massively ahead now. He does not even need any points in the area marked by the triangles.
FR: yeh, now it's alive, but in cost of blacks moyo in the upper-left. Now game looks almost hopeless for me and only crazy invasion saved it. So, I'll be gratiful for any hints about earlyer moves, lead to such disaster
TH: If black plays A, the game is over.
FR: is it possible for black to kill?  TH: Black is ahead by a few points if he does not kill. Perhaps he should just solidify his borders?
FR: My big misstake :( I think, it's better to defend around g7? TH: Yes that move was small.
FR: lost ko threat :(  TH: Indeed.
TH: and another.
TH: black wastes a move.
TH: Black has a better move at A. See variation.
TH: Black could have saved his stones. See variation.
TH: Better here.
TH: You can play A instead.  B and C are probably bigger.
TH: a black play at A does not work. You do not need to defend. You are now ahead. Commentary ends here.  Read the summary written at move 2 again. Good luck with your games.
Dear Reviewer,  Thanks for reviewing this game.  Please comment on my comments, and also feel free to criticize as much as you want!  In general, I felt that I had power early and through the middle game, but that my technique failed to use it properly.  Please comment on this as well.  Thanks!
Playing this pincer/extension combo is why I like to play the opposing 3-4 stones.  Why do you think its so good? When playing this kinf of pincer you can expect, as the most simple outcome, to have black build some wall from the pincered stone and pincer your pincer. And then the important question is, how he can settle it. And with your komoku, instead og hoshi, that would be normal here, its easy for black.
difficult joseki...
Mistake, this can't end well for black
nice move
wrong
You lost your advantage with this ko.
Almost pass
Also correct. Sthrengthens your weakest stones while black is hopeless.
so you play this first, ok.
Its easy this way :)
Ok, so I ended up with a nice gain in the lower right, and since my strength is facing the upper right, I should move in that direction like this, no?  Now your lead is so large, that the game should be easy anyway.  Yes, the direction is right, but..
This has to be crazy of black!  Black is loosing, so this kind of move is a good try.
Hmm, looking at this now, perhaps I should've leaned on the top as in the variation?  This is correct, its strong.
Now I feel like I'm under attack!  Haha, not at all :) Both black sides are weak, so you are alright.
Driving Black toward my thickness, right?  Yup, perfect
This seems alive. So now you can either let it be as it is to preserve ko threats, or try to gain something more in sente.
Hmm, I probably didn't need to respond here since I could always follow up with A  Right
Now you give him extra points
Ok, he lived, but small.  And I've gained great thickness, right?!  Why am I not using it correctly????  Giving him extra six points is not small, this is about 15 point worse than my variation.  And to the influence - this is fine, we will see what comes next. Now black has to make two eyes in the corner and you should then have sente to make a moyo.
Also not but, but it also has a weakness, at A
Same comment from before.  Isn't this the right direction from my thickness?  Again the high approach is better.
Again he goes too deep!!
And again I attack directly when perhaps I should do a leaning attack as in the variation?  Attack like this is absolutely correct. Black should die.  But keima would be a lot better. Ogeima is a strong move, if used in a right place, because its faster and can kill where keima could't. But with your wall stretching far towards the bottom, you don't need to hurry and you should prefere the more safe move.
Now black can hardly die...
Hmm, maybe the cut does works?
Unnecesary.  I just close CGoban and the unsaved game closed with it :( So the comments might be a bit briefer than before :)
For the third time, I have great thickess and I'm on the attack, why isn't it working?
Because you play gote :)
Ok, now it was a good move :))
Black should die here...
Well, I would be afraid of B tenuki, the risk is too high.
This move is too close to black. While defending, you want to make some mess and to have some stones to attack. You give him one. Important proverb - attack from distance.  Although a good move is hard to find here...
Again to close.  The fight is complicated and already deformed by unnatural moves, so commenting on it would be pointless.
Black made the mess he needs to make some eyes.
The result is not so bad :)
But this is a problem...
I didn't see the variation.  You only want to play this endgame instead of A, when the fist line bend then would be sente for you. This is not the case.  Now the game is lost, so the comment ends here. But see the later variations and the end.
[Markus]: Variation leads to a weak black group.
[Markus]: First defend possible cutting points
[Markus]: Touching stones here is to agressive
lifyhaze [13k]: hi
Tuomas: Black should not play here at this point of the game. The idea of playing 4-4 is to get maximum amount of influence in one corner with single stone. It does not even try to take that corner. Now that black dives straight in white can force black into a fight where black is in disadvantage.  First there is a handy way to analyze the situation. Of course this is none of the traditional josekis but you can try to revert the situation back to standard joseki. Even if the stones are played in different order, if the end result matches a joseki you can be reasonably happy. The simple joseki that comes to mind is as a variation. Now lets just play that in other order. See variation.  But note that playing joseki in another order does not always work. But it is handy tool that you can use when you analyze situations.  Here I would try to gain some advantage from the unortohox approach that black took. I would try to press black down and to close him into the upper left corner. This should give black a nice wall towards two black corners. We come back to this later.
Tuomas: This feels too thin and slow. Black corner is wide open for example black 1. Also this does not really build any frameworks.
Tuomas: Here black is too thin allowing white to cut through these stones.
Tuomas: Taking the corner is big but I still consider it as a mistake because it lets white seal black in the corner and take initiative. First white plays '1' to prevent black escape towards bottom. Black is likely do play another stone to the corner to stay alive and then white can approach at '3' or '4'.   With black sealed in the corner white could take full use of the wall in upper left. The result would be crushing to black.
Tuomas: Unnecessary and clumsy exchange.
Tuomas: Now that the upper left corner is alive playing '1' is not so tempting anymore. White should take the huge point and play '2'.
Tuomas: Now that the black is really really confined to the coner white must play '1'.
Tuomas: Too little, too slow. White does not take advantage from the huge influence he has. Black can just play '1' to minimize the white framework.
Tuomas: I would not play this because now black loses lot of options.
Tuomas: Capturing this kind of stones is very difficult. They have lot of space to run and black can always sacrifice few stones and rescue rest. Because white group is alive his best option is to ignore these stones. Let them be here and play on other sides of the board. Doing this will force black to constantly keep eye on these stones and consider if they are getting in danger.  Basically if white leaves stones here black can not allow white to build any kind of influence towards center. And that means black must submit to deals where white takes lot of territory while black gets influence.  And a little note: capturing these stones is not that big. Ten or perhaps twenty points. Not worth the trouble.
Tuomas: This is huge point but black is a little thin. White could just throw a stone at '1' and make a huge fight with black in clear disadvantage. Black would have a weak group at upper left and upper middle. White would have one weak group at upper right.
Tuomas: Black takes a key point. Now if you consider the white wall in upper left corner you notice that it is not worth much more than the black upper right corner. And black took the upper left corner too so white is already at disadvantage. All this because white did not play the key point at '1'.  The remaining big points are '2', '3' and '4'.
Tuomas: Not worh the trouble. Play '1', it is a lot bigger. If black keeps on rescuing these while white graps the big points, white wins.
Tuomas: Too far. Black is starting to have central influence so playing here will leave white open to heavy attack.
Tuomas: Good, white took a big point and is now in clear advantage. Cgoban score estimation is W+31.5.
Tuomas: Unfortunately this will be very difficult to handle. Most important is to keep white '1' safe. Playing '2' is propably a good start.
Tuomas: This idea works better if you start from '1'.
Tuomas: Big aji-keshi. You lose good opportunities with this. Playing '1' would be better.
Tuomas: Now consider this result if the situation in upper left was not resolved. If black was not so close to connect around '1' he could not allow this kind of result. Because that upper left situation is already almost resolved black can take this kind of exchange where white gets more influece and black gains some territory.  White influence is also worthless because black already has the stones that are needed to prevent from making territory with this wall.
JenT [14k]: 1 sec lifyhaze [13k]: ? JenT [14k]: ok JenT [14k]: sorry JenT [14k]: someone stopped by to talk
lifyhaze [13k]: k
Tuomas: Small, there are no territory around here. Playing aroudnd '1' would allow white to build a framework and '2' would prevent black corner enclosure.
Tuomas: Black plays another stone that should be ignored. If white plays '1' he attack this and prevents corner enclosure. Another alternative is to play '2' and build the framework white attacking this.
Tuomas: Too little, too close. Think big.
Tuomas: Too slow, black will just play '1' and you are still even.
Tuomas: Playing '1' here would reduce headache in near future.
Tuomas: This last defence is not necessary. Black too too large corner but even now white can get nice result by playing at '1'. He gets huge freamwork and leave black in disadvantage.
Tuomas: Not necessary.
Tuomas: Too little, too slow. Think big. Have more courage and go pick a fight.
Tuomas: Black took a key point but white is so strong that he should take his changes and charge at '1'.
Tuomas: How many points does this make? Ten perhaps. You know - too little, too slow. White is about 10-20 points behind.
Tuomas: Touching a stone like this will just make it stronger. White loses a great attack here.
Tuomas: Uraaa! Attack with everything you got at '1'. The center is not interesting.
Tuomas: White had done this several times already. Do not let your opponent to capture this kind of stones. It gives him too good shape. Think about extending at '1' for example. That would put the marked stones in serious danger.
Tuomas: Again.
Tuomas: Well that went nicely for white. Black shoud propably play '1' instead of this. That corner looks dangerous. Now white '2' should make quite nice mess in here. Please try out some variations and check if you can get the white '2' out from there.
is this the correct area to play? how about pincering the P16 stone instead?  Trillian: Yes, it is a very good move. I don't want to tenuki in this corner because c17 would be very big for white.
is this the correct move?  Trillian: Yes! I think with the F16-stone a pincer is excellent.
Is this a good move?
is this a good answer?  Trillian:
white just didnt want to strengthen n15 in any way. is this a good idea?  Trillian: I think letting black play N14 hurts worse than strenghtening him with N14.
is this the correct answer?  Trillian: of course! Later F15 will make a promising moyo.
Trillian: I think you should simply leave this corner as it is and take sente (C8!). Later you can come back and make life in the corner or sacrifice with P18.
Trillian: Unluckily for you this doesn't work without N16.
i thought about B or C, but for some stupid reason i discarded them and play A instead - terrible mistake.
Trillian: wrong direktion. The left side is much more important than the corner. You can connect with M18 for example. (see var.)
this is painful  Trillian: yes!
f16 looks retarded now  Trillian: but this is an important move anyway.
white later says this move is bad  Trillian: More natural is the variation.
Is this move ok for black? how about black A instead?  Trillian: I think it is better than A. (see var.)
Trillian: good move!
white likes this outcome better than white Q6, because N4 is promising for w. and b cannot play O4 because K4 is in a good position. right?  Trillian: This move (alternative N5) is joseki. Q6 is almost never played.
white is relieved - now c11 does not work anymore :<
i counted black behind even if black plays S6. so i invaded deep and hoped for a fight that makes black alive while still leaving the option to play S6 later.  Trillian: Behind or not, this invasion is too deep. Better play some reducing move (like O11 - which may also be deep) and eventually follow-up with R12.
i tried to use the black move at O14
Trillian: you're in a big trouble now.
i successfully created a fight, but white has the advantage :(  Trillian: You gave a very big sure-territory with 3 stones inside for a unpromising fight for your own group. This is not very successfull because white will have no problem connecting his group to the left.
*black resigns*  mafutrct: i thought that black dies first. i'll show my reading in the following moves.  Trillian: This is definitely too early to resign.
mafutrct: this was my reading, my idea was that black dies first now. but i probably was wrong^^  Trillian: Reading out only one variation cannot be enough to resign. Also this variation gould be wrong ^^.
Trillian: 4 liberties vs. 3!
H: White must provoke fighting.  see variation
fine!
H: small ------------------------- David: But I was concerned  about the life of my group?  -------------------- H: Don't risk to be confined  to the edge.  see variation
H: But Black plays small as well.
H:  Black is timid  variation
H: Black is going to make  four big mistakes.
H: at 'a' to avoid a ko.
H: variation
H:  see variation
H: see variation
David: this move possibly lost me the game - should have played at O11
H: variation
better at 'a'.
H: small  see variation
PM:  Why the high approach?  What was your plan?
PM:  This is one of those situations where Joseki comes in handy.  The Tiger's mouth shape seems good, but there are advantages to connecting solidly at O16 instead.  Please see variation.
In this part, after Black played at K17, I thought this should prevent Black from getting more territory and give me more influence.  PM:  This was a good thought, but you had to be mindfull of the cut at Q15.  I would prefer Q14.
PM:  I think the other hane would have worked better.  Remember:  Cut apart your opponant while connecting yourself.  Don't do one at a time.
PM:  Notice now that you have two weak groups, while black is relatively secure in the corner.
PM.  Good idea and nicely executed, however the fact that you're trying to strengthen one of two weak groups gives black additional tempo to begin an assault elsewhere.
PM:  Don't always think in terms of attacking the "invading" stone.  With this much area open there's no such thing as an "invasion".  You know black will run either right or left, plan your answer based on what will profit you the most.  3-point extension on the third line lives, usually.
PM:  Taking the "double wing" is higher priority here, I think
After Black's move I didn't know if I should have played at C4 or D3  PM: I think you handled this well enough.  "Block on the wider side", they say.
PM: Wrong direction.  Let black crawl along the second line all they want.  The wall you get in return is worth much more than the small territory gained.
PM:  Thank-you move by black.  Empty triangle = very bad
PM:  Too passive, see variation
PM:  Letting black get this enclosure was huge.  You had a few opprotunities to take this point yourself.  The trick is identifying which moves you can safely ignore.
I was trying to extend towards the center but I was insecure about making a one-point space jump or a keima.  PM:  Far too small.  If you want to connect your two weak tiger's mouths, O14 seems like the logical place.  There are bigger points on the board, though.
Was this Boshi an unecessary move?  PM:  Your O16 group has become very heavy.  I think black used this to his advantage to strengthen their moyo.
PM:  Black's northwestern corner looks terrifying now, but maybe there's a way?
Were these moves a too passive? Black had already taken 3 corners, so I guess I was a bit desperate to compensate that loss.  PM: I would probably play the same, from this position you can strangle blacks southern group with a press from the east, as well as blacks northwestern group with a press from the south.  This is also probably the only way you're going to save the weak white northern group.
I made this move trying to extend some influence from the territory on the right, but I was worried about the marked stone invading it.  PM:  I'd be more worried about the life of your northern group than your territory in the east-of-center
PM:  I'd extend towards some friendlies...
PM:  Big move
White should have extended on the left (M12 or even L11)? Or was this the right way?  PM:  See variations
PM:  This stone isn't important.  See variation.
PM:  This has no hope of working.  Better to put pressure on black while strengthening your own group instead.  See variation.
PM:  Wasted move.
PM:  Attachment is something you don't want to just jump away from, from what I can tell.
I didn't know if I should have played in this point of Keshi, because of the marked stone, or if G13 would have been a better  place to play.  PM:  Here's where it get's tricky.  I think the large knight's move to D13 might have been a bit too far.  See variations.
After B103, preventing the connection at D11 or stopping Black from going towards the center at F11 would have been better. I was afraid of being cut and Black continuing advancing if I made a Hane at F11.......
....so I connected.
PM:  You've made yet another weak group for yourself.  Defending it will give tempo to black
PM:  Where are you running to, exactly?  There's no room to make a base on the side.
PM:  Don't double hane on the first line, doesn't work out very well.
PM:  You don't really profit at all from taking this ko, except by forcing black to defend.  You might say that taking this ko is only valuable as a ko threat for a different ko somewhere elseon the board.
PM:  You gave up sente without a good reason, see variation.
I made a mistake here right? I thought I could kill the corner by playing here, but I looks like I was wrong. Was there a was to kill the black stones or were they alive from the beggining.  PM:  Black lives here as far as I can tell, but as long as black resists you didn't really lose anything by trying.
PM:  Good reading
PM:....But, just because you have a ladder, that doesn't mean you have to play the ladder sequence mechanically.  See variation.
PM:  Save little exchanges like this for actual threats, don't just play them because you can.  You never know when having one more Ko threat than the other person will make or break a game.
PM:  I try to use as a rule of thumb any situation where you're reduced to 2 liberties on the second line is no good.  Also, placing black's stone in atari in a situation where it's forced to connect to a friendly stone should also be sending up warning flags in your head.
Was there a way to save the marked white stones when black played at Q6. Should I have connected there earlier?
PM:  Wrong direction.  Drive black towards your strength, not open territory.  You have plenty of chances to connect.  See variations.
And Black started destroying White's territory. What was more important: saving the white stones or the corner and side?  PM:  Count it out for yourself.  It looks like the corner is worth more, but we both better practice our counting if we ever want to get to 1st Dan.
Panda123 [4k]: hi Panda123 [4k]: gl Panda123 [4k]: hf Onopko [3k]: hi
Odd opening. Usually if you play here its a low play. Low play is better first of all because you would probably want to make a base. A high play would be used for some of the reasons here:  1. Making a framework. 2. Reducing a framework. 3. Help with fighting.
i would prefer to approach on top side because thats where w has his shimari extension.
Panda123 [4k]: I am not sure how to respond to this move here. I know there are some basic josekis for this but i am not sure how to respond seeing D10 piece is there also.  D10 can only help you here if you use it right. Here are a few josekis.
Panda123 [4k]: This was bad move?  This move lets w connect his stones but w didnt play that way I'll show you.
This was a mistake in direction and is not a proper move. K3 is low and now w connected without you getting much.
W gained alot more in this exchange plus F2 is still open.
Panda123 [4k]: Was this move too early? I don't know much about the two-space high approach but I'm also not sure why u played this and not the one-space low or high approach. Are you scared of getting pincered?
Well here I don't know why w pincered I guess he likes fighting. Top is more important I think. Variations here are complex. To keep it simple I might just jump out.
Only reason you would play this is because you want to connect under.
This was really bad for B.
Panda123 [4k]: too ddp Panda123 [4k]:
this is obvious move.
You have to remember you are also strengthening white when you play this. If I was white i might hane from other side cause I will probably end up with nice influence if you survive.
Nice move.
Better shape shown.
Panda123 [4k]: sorry about that
Letting these stones connect was very bad.
Ouch for b.
W is very greedy i dont seem him living now. Actually a calm play would be O6 or so.
This leaves bad aji I think.
Panda123 [4k]: black N8 better? This was bad helps him make eyeshape.
Now he connects in snapback..
Panda123 [4k]: x)
Panda123 [4k]: Here i already know how to prevent i miscalculated here
Panda123 [4k]: thnx Panda123 [4k]: THANKS AGAIN SO MUCH FOR REVIEW. I need very badly and want to improve!
Linux: D18 here is too passive I think. To  jump out with A has better effect on the rigt white stone. A double approach around B is also a good move.  I would to invade. See Variation.
Linux: Normally A is the widest move for white.
Linux: If you want to play here, you has to play A.  You dont have to settle your D18 group at this time. Better is to let the situation as it is and take a big point around B.
Linux: With B16 you makes your opponent strong only ... and this sequence ends in sente for white.  Locally F15 is the better threat.
Linux: To let white approach here is the result of the too mild moves at the top.
Linux: This move is a little fearfully. Black should try to take the initiative on the left side with A.
Linux: This is an ideal approach  for white. It attack the corner AND prepare an moyo at the left. (The H5 stone couldnt help your group here effective). Black has no good follow up move. I would suggest A and fight.
Linux: To let white take this point loose the game I think. Your handicap is eaten up (at move 23!)
R13 was the wrong side to approach. (see variation) Think of the weakness ouf your Q4 group
Linux: This is the similar situation as before. H5 and P13 have no enough effect and help white to develop himself.
Linux: J17 here is not enough. White is ahead, so you must attack him. Maybe at A. One hope for black is to split white at the left. His extension to D12 is not well balanced so C6 can be attacked.
This invasion is too deep and comes too late... Maybe black has a chance to attack the r11 group. but this can be dangerous, while he is weak at the bottom.
I get off the hook a little easy here; I had written off the left side.
I should have cut with e7 here, I think
Only now did I understand that the c9 group could get cut.
I was torn between saving p7 and living small in the se corner.
k15 was small and insignificant.   Maybe k18 or p18 or q15 would have gained more.   I thought I could reduce liberties for k17 and push under and remove the base.    Not as easily as I thought, and only at the cost of the center.
So I got the top like I wanted but I paid more than I thought in the center.
r15 did not work like I wanted it to.  I thought I could connect and save the corner and push towards center.
I wanted to push to the right, but I probably should have played l11 to make my life easy.
Oops.  Now I remembered the lack of liberties for n19 and kk19.
I got pushed around and around in the center.
Clearly q19 is much bigger than b11.  I could have smiled and ignored a12.
My fantasy was to push/lure d10 into a lack of liberties so I could snatch up a6.
r15 has liberties so t15 does not work.  I can safely connect.
W calmly makes an eye and prevents all future threats.
Xinwen :::  K16 was kinda an interesting move by white. It seems K16 is full of confident.  In another point of view, K16 is actually trying to counterattack your R16.
Xinwen :::  I am not sure about J17 as i usually would think of "A", "B" or "C" answering the K16.  Reason is that, K16 doesnt get any land and D16 is weak and vulnerable to attack.
Xinwen :::  In the consequences, white actually get a bigger corner BUT it is still insecure as black has "A", "B" or "C"
Was this move good?  Xinwen :::  Indeed, white P16 is good as when white's C then B, white got strengthen. because white has K16.  But frankly saying, i think the game still even as white corner wasn't that secure.  So my suggestion is that you should have pincer it at "D" or "E" would be better?  But now, when you go back to your 8th move, which i think it is the cause.
Xinwen :::  Probably, O18 was a overplay, kinda too greedy because black need to settle the 2 stones by playing at "B" and doing "A" by black would also be nice.
Xinwen :::  Again, i think making "L18" move is not consider URGENT, settling at R14 would be better
Xinwen :::  To answer your "Q 17 move, was it good"?  The answer shown here, it is bad.
Xinwen :::  Attacking at C18 is kinda early.
Xinwen :::  Yes, Ignoring and attack at F3 is good.
Xinwen :::  I don't think attacking in this way is good you help to strengthen white. Moreover, the invasion part i mentioned earlier gone.
Xinwen :::  Actually, i don't like B11, your shape got heavier, do you not think so ?
Xinwen :::  Don't be happy that White didn't manage to kill black, because white made a mistake somewhere.  Need to learn to win by skill not by luck ^^^
Xinwen :::  And in fact, doing this kind of move does not help much.  1) you managed to dig some lands from white  2) White gains thickness toward the center.  Something to remember that you need timing to do invasion, recklessly doing it will cause you lots of pain.
Xinwen ::  This is kinda greedy it does not gain anything.
Xinwen :::  This is very good invasion by white.   White has thickness to invade which is very good
Xinwen :::  Saving the white stones very bad.
Xinwen :::  This is too much again, just E1 kinda of move would be better.
Xinwen :::  you lost here ^^^  The reason behinds that, you don't know how to judge the timing of invasion, and you are too concern about territory profit which in return you give away the thickness to the other player.  Must balance,  every territory of yours must learn to jump out facing the center of the board.
JUSTTGO [10k]: u lose becos u wanna anything on the board  Xinwen :::  like the white said ^^^ don't be too greedy lol.  If you have any problem please don't feel hesitate to consult me at Brunei Room (National)  KGS nick ::: Xinwen/ Darkxinwen
Jon:  Approaching the top left corner is plausible, but because black is using the Chinese opening, it's a bit contradictory to his original plan (i.e. to build a framework).  Can you find a move that would be a better fit with black's plan of building a territorial framework?
Jon:  Attaching into the corner is the wrong choice of joseki here.  By strengthening the corner stone prematurely, black won't be able to press down on the stone at A as easily to build influence towards the center.  For more information on this, please see the variations at move 16.  What should black do instead?
Jon:  Fixing the cut directly is a key mistake in this fight.  While it's solid, it puts white in a very low position, allowing black to make the kosumi at A in sente.    Can you find a move that strengthens the corner while denying black that opportunity?
Jon:  Now white wants to get out of the low position, so working his way to higher ground is necessary, but black will be able to get the pressing move at A now.
Jon:  Good!  This is a very important area for both players, so it's plausible to play away from the left side for this.  White getting here first means the Chinese opening's development is checked, it can't move down either side (the top or bottom), which is painful for black.  Also, later, pushing up at A would be a nice move for white on the left side.
Jon:  Placing this extension on the third line feels a bit weird because the stone at A is now awkwardly placed.  To provide another perspective, please imagine this current move at K-3 was played first, then at A.  It would be best placed at N-3 (B) instead to prevent black from digging underneath.  With all of this said, this stone would be best placed on the fourth line (at C) to avoid leaving any awkwardly placed stones.
Jon:  Since white neglected the marked stones to attack the bottom right, allowing black to attack them is reasonable, but pincering on the third line is dangerous, it allows white to separate it from the black stones above easily when he escapes.  Instead, placing this stone on the fourth line (at A) still puts the pressure on the white stones while making it harder to separate from the other black stones.
Jon:  Now the attacker is starting to become the defender, black's stone at A is not feeling too happy .
Jon:  Since white's bottom left corner stone is now under attack from black's approach, it's more important to strengthen the corner first.  White's marked stones are already on their way out into the center, so they can wait temporarily.  What's the best way to strengthen the bottom left corner?
Jon:  White's pretty strong on the bottom, so double approaching feels a bit questionable for black.  It'd be safer to take the 3-3 invasion right away.
Jon:  Once black has made the double approach, bumping (and thus strengthening) the first approach stone is no longer a good idea, you'll need as much room as you can to move out.  What's a better way to move out white's corner stone?
Jon:  It's painful for black to have to fix the cut like this and allow black into the corner, but he has no choice.
Jon:  This is the right idea, but it's too slow, black can safely move into the corner more quickly by sliding to A.
Jon:  Killing off these black stones is the right idea, but this hane makes your potential territory smaller by playing inside it, so it'd be better to go for the whole thing with the cap at A right away.
Jon:  Capping the two black stones is fine here, but the stone at A is no longer so useful.
Jon:  Starting this invasion is a bit dangerous since the marked black stones aren't settled yet.  I'd prefer to move them out with a jump to A first before making the invasion.
Jon:  Blocking from this side is extremely dangerous, white can't afford to let black separate his stones apart.
Jon:  This has the right idea, but it's too direct, black can push through and exploit the cutting points easily, so a more subtle move is necessary.  Can you find a more effective way to pressure the marked black stones?
Jon:  Before black fixes this weakness, he can pressure the outside white stones by threatening to capture two of them with A.  Beyond that though, black made a nice amount of points here, so white will have to destroy some of the right side to compensate.
Jon:  White is decently strong on the outside, so I'd consider invading directly in the side at A and leave the possibility for invading the corner open.  By probing, black's block at B will make it harder to invade the area around A.
Jon:  The upper part of the right side is a lot bigger than the corner, so it'd be better to defend the black stone at A and let white live in the corner.
Jon: Because of the impending attack black can launch on this group and the bottom white stones, white will need to gain more breathing room in the center, so the hane from the other side is recommended.
Jon:  This move is very "sharp", separating white's groups effectively and setting up a good attack.
Jon:  Pushing again on the second line is not recommended, it's only getting a point or two for white, but is also giving black more strength towards the outside.  What's a better way for white to defend his weak group?
Jon:  A key mistake, white must attack black's invading stone at A and prevent it from separating the top without a fight.
Jon:  It'd be better to hane at A first since it's a sente, opening up a threatening cut at B after black blocks.  There isn't too much else to comment on in the endgame, so this is the last comment before the end of the game.  Please skip to move 271 for the final comments and closing summary.
I'm not terribly used to seeing the 5-4 opening move. Nevertheless, I think this move might be troublesome. The three diagonal shape like this is called the elephant jump and it can be cut without much effort. So once you are invaded, you will have to take care of this weakness. I've made a few variations of other moves that might be better.
I think that this is a bad move by w. You should play a pincer here to build what you started in the bottom right corner.
This move should be played if and only if you have an extension at the top such as the marked point.
This move seems rather soft. You leave your corner open and this doesn't real seal w in. Also, your wall might be hard to put to good use as it has many cutting points. Variation is included...
White takes advantage of the mistake.
This move can often work to split w apart. The problem here is that you are missing q14, if that was filled, you might be able to take a profit here. I'll try it in a variation.
One too many hane's, I'm afraid. White takes your stone and gets good shape as punishment.
Lesson learned! At this point, you have an incredibly thick wall. It's quite important to make a good use out of it. The proverb says "Play away from thickness" & "Don't make territory with thicknes." So if we keep these things in mind. It might be good to approach white on the bottom to see what kind of moyo you can make by attacking w.
This move is slack. White can't do much real damage with this. I would take this chance to tenuki (play elsewhere) and get the initiative.
This move doesn't work. You might want to defend the weaknesses. W might be able to cause trouble.
This move should probably protect the bottom. The top seems ok to me.
Ouch. White tries to make your wall ineffective.
This was a mistake that i used to make a lot. I would try to build territory with my walls. It's a habit you absolutely must break. You need to attack k16 from the other side. Try to push white towards your wall so that you can make profit with the resulting attack. I've included a possible variation.
This is a bit too close to w's kosumi, i might move it over one point to the left.
This is a mistake in my opinion. White should net give you good shape with this atari.
Playing on the second line might be a bit slow here. It'd be wise to play the atari and build the extra strength.
Here it is!
This isn't quite as effective now that w has C15 in place. W can cut at g15 and it would really hurt.
This is endgame stuff. Much too small for the current situation. Your group is in deep trouble if w cuts with g15.
An odd move. You do a good job of taking advantage.
The fighting that just happened was bad news for b. Your wall is accomplishing less and less as white moves this living group closer to it.
White beats you to it.
Same mistake. You are playing too close to your own thickness. Don't be afraid to play boldy. Force white into a fight he doesnt want.
Empty triangle is not ideal here.
This isnt quite the move. But good eye for spotting something fishy. The variation is shown.
This can't end well for b.
Every move you play for a ladder that doesnt work, is costing you points. Lots of em!
hmm...you made your choice of which one to get, but it looks like w should be able to kill your group now.
White doesn't miss the chance.
Aha. A chance for salvation! Let's check this out
Uh oh. White has seen the error and fixed it. Things don't look good for black now.
This move doesn't help you escape.
This fighting, as you saw by how it played out, doesn't help you much. It might be best to just live on the left.
The game is looking more and more settled in white's favor.
Uf! This is one the biggest points on the board. Not much hope now.
I like your fighting spirit here!
I would extend up for sure.
Heh, this finally comes back to haunt ya it seems.
ChidoRi has resigned the game.  There were definitely some life and death mistakes, but I don't think that was the main issue. The best way to work on that stuff would be to do lots of life and death problems at goproblems.com You might also want to take a look at tesuji problems.   The big issue seems to me the wall. Once all the dust settled from your first fights on the right...you had that massive wall. The only way to win the game after that is to make sure that it gets put to good use. I went back to the beginning of the game and included an example that illustrates the point.   Overall, I think you have a good deal of potential, and I like the fighting spirit. It's just a matter of knocking out a few opening concepts, and you will be a single digit kyu before you know it.  I hope this has been helpful.  Take care, Tim
> perhaps C6 is better, to aim at extending to K3? E4 aims at extending on the left side. Something like C10. However, C6 is to far up to fully support a move on the third row like K3.
> K3 better? No. If white invades at K3 black will attack that stone and strengthen his stones on line 4. R10 is good.
> Is the two point jump here to timid - better to jump to marked places?  If  I should jump to the triangle - how would I answer white at P10. No. Its not to timid. If you jump to O or N white have the option of cutting R10 off and you will be stuck with two week groups to defend.
F3 is a bit timid I think, and could be squeezed more closely than K17 by black (?)
> perhaps I should have played Q16 here? No. P17 needs support.
R19, being an edge move is probably too passive at such an early stage? > Yes. R18 could have been used elsewhere. Like, C12, N10. The R10 group is a bit too week.
> P18 to protect the cut Q18 better? If one wants to protect R19 and R18 yes. I'm not so sure it's worth it though. See variation.
This is a bad move. Protect P17 with the move P18 instead. If white plays Q19 you play O16. See variation.
> O17 better? Yes, see variation.
White should have played M17 here. See variations.
> looking at the end of the game, the marked stones die (as part of large groups).  Perhaps I should have answered M8 more directly at M10 (for example)? Or K8  M10, is probably too far away. N10 is better. E10 invites whites next move. C15 needs a base. Instead of E10 play C12.
Now C15 is in trouble.
While black struggles to connect all his stones. White makes terrotory along the edges.
Is black trying to connect his E10 group with his E4 group here or is he trying to make terrotory between C4 and C8? He will not get both. See variations.
> this is probably a very bad move ?  A cut is used to split up groups so that they become week. Here both sides of the cut are strong so the cut makes on sense. On top of that white can play G9 and the cut will fail anyway.
> thinking about what happened in the long run of this game, perhaps I should have connected underneath G4 at G3 too keep my stones in the corner connected?  G3 is better since it makes terretory along the edge. A better way to strenghten the lower rigth corner group (instead of connecting) is to extend it with a move like L3.
> I didn't like "white's two-jump wall" here but this black stone looks lonely! ?  perhaps it would be better to extend from my corner at M4 or near?  Playing a stone close to your oponents strong possitions is often bad. If your stone survives it's still weak and your oponent can use this too strengthen his possition even more. While he attacks your stone he will build up an even bigger wall.
> there's a lot of subtle moves now, which I think I played slightly wrongly which allowed white to connect too easily.  I think this is the first mistake - should have been played at O5?  I think this move is ok. To stop white from connecting you shold have playd M4 instead of K8. Even then it's questionable. If you cut white you will force him to attack your P10 group which is something you don't want.
J7 instead. That will force white H7 and then you can place black J6.
> allowing white the ponnuki shape is probably a bad idea.... ?  It's pretty surrounded so it no biggie.
> i felt L6 was necessary to give me an eye shape, avoid getting crushed  It's not. It protects against a cut though (white k6). However, this cut is not so bad. Responding to white N13 is a better move. Your P10 group is in big trouble now.
> I think this is weak move - perhaps N11 to try to avoid black stones P10 and R10 being cutoff is better?  The stones are pretty much already cut of. I would have gone for black Q13 insted. See variations.
> i filled here to avoid the Ko followed by the cut- apparently I'm not at all concerned the stones on the RHS have no eyes  You can connect the stones the other way too. See variation.
This move is too smal. Save it for the endgame.
Your black group is in so much trouble now that you should be very happy if it survives.
> i think this kind of move and white's response is what lost me the game?  I think not protecting your black group in time lost you the game.
i'm thinking about eyes too late
> this looks like a strong move, but white's respone puts me in my place.  Could I play this if S12 was black?  Yes.. you could. But it would not give you eyes so it's still not good.
stupid mistake - should have played T4?  T4 would have been better but still pretty small. There are bigger moves to play. H15 maybe.
> another stupid mistake!  Yes, this is very bad.
That group is dead now. You should have gone for R3 instead.
Now you gave white a chance to make it even worse.
From the other side. T3 is dead so therefore R3 is alive and you have to protect from the other side.
> i can't remember why I didn't take the ko - this isn't good play from me  I'm not sure it would have worked anyway.
edge move here is probably premature?  Yes.
Save moves likes this for the end of the endgame.
What is this move good for? Here you need a move that strengthens your F9-E10-E13-D14 group. Something like H12.
> i think this is a weak attack - perhaps there is a better move, around H13?  E11 is better. See variations.
> simple move J17 necessary first?  no
J10 better perhaps to connect lower and upper groups?
Again, I amazed I didn't connect at J10
white punishes me for forgetting this - I think this was the key failiure for me in this game - i made some other mistakes but this was the worst mistake.
You saved K11 anyway.
> i'm probably over-extending myself here and need to protect the cut instead?  Thats correct.
> another stupid move!  =)
White B3 and it start all over again! Black B3 or B2.
white B3 wins more points?  Yes.
this is yet another dumb move, but white doesn't take it
> i'm not sure why white played this  He missed it. Just as you missed B3.
daft move!
this is probably silly too  It is since white has the m1 eye.
Scipio [4k]: hi peterchris [5k]: hi hf
yoyoma: White chooses to place a stone on the top-side making a double pincer, rather than pressing down from R15.  Generally this means white wants to build the top instead of the right.  But why?  D16 is black.    Another purpose could be if white was very strong in the area, to attack black severely.  But that isn't the case here either.  Of course a final purpose could be to fight for fun and/or confusion.  :)  Personally I have extremely limited experience facing these double pincers.  I have put some variations I found on http://eidogo.com (kogo's) and also Ishida.
peterchris: what is the best move here for black in this double pincer?  yoyoma: According to kogo's, this is a simplifying variation.  Furthermore generally when double pincered your first thought should be to go out.  See variation.
Take some normal opening point.
This move is not necessary to live.  When possible, don't trade inside moves for outside moves.
peterchris: what is the proper pincer to play here?  or not a pincer at all?  yoyoma:  Personally I would not pincer.  Look where the most open area is.  The left side is much wider/open than the top.  It seems hard for white to build the top because of the cut at N17 and the hole at P16.  So the left seems bigger.  Another reason to pincer would be if you can create a weak group to attack.  However N18/O17 is not really a "group", they are kikashi, forcing moves.  They can be discarded if needed.  The other part, white Q15 is strong.  See variation.
Now black abandons the D16 stone.  Almost always black should defend.  Not defending suggests that the benefit from continuing on the top is huge, but that's not the case here.
Probably overplay.
Black choses to cut here instead of D14.  This is complicated but I don't think black is good here.
Bad, white loses a liberty.
peterchris: here I chose to try for influence, rather than to try to kill the group on the edge.  was this correct?  yoyoma:  Seems reasonable.  Saving D16 and making thickness is good.
peterchris: was it smart to play here?  what is the best way to use this influence?  yoyoma: Ideally you would not want to be forced to add a move to your wall.  The question is:  Is the wall thick?  Or does it lack sufficient eyes?  See the illustration a few moves back.  So is this move slow?  Or is it honte/thick?  I tend to think it could be slow but I'm not sure.
yoyoma:  To push a 2nd time is much more questionable.
Now I'm getting the feeling that actually you're trying to build points in the middle.  This is not in the correct spirit of using influence.  You should rather push your opponent against it, and make your points somewhere else.  See variation.
Seems like overplay.  I would be on the lookout for white sacrificing the stones for influence on the outside.
Aggressive move.  The situation is very complicated so I'm not sure what is best.
peterchris: what is the "ideal play" resolution of this corner invasion?  See variation on next move for black.
See variation.
Black paid too much for this ko.
peterchris: how can black use the thickness remaining in the center?  or is it best to try for something on the side?  yoyoma:  I think the bottom is bigger since P9 already looks into the right.  However I think it will be hard to comeback now.
This is not enough to win the game, you should try something more appropriate for how far behind you are.  q6/P9 are already almost connected anyways.
after this move a difficult game was completely lost. no need to review after this point.
peterchris [5k]: oops
my main questions are about the fight in upper right corner,and blacks center in end game  thanks
janr: AFAIK, A is better (joseki) here, as with the game move white gets a quite low position.
janr: An alternative it to play around A to not get flat on both sides.
janr: I'm not sure white is strong enough to push through here.  The advantage of playing the submissive move of A is that black is not strengthened and the cutting points remain.
janr: capturing a stone is great but white too will capture a stone and get the left side.  How about trying to fence white in as in the variation ?
good for w?  janr: black made a strong group with 12 points of territory.  Even though white has a ponnuki, I dont think he is much better here.
janr: somehow I feel here that black is getting a solid position and influence here.  The white ponuki on the left can probably only be fully effective if there is a target to attack.  Therefore, maybe it was better to make a moyo (A instead of B), or fight (C instead of D).
janr: I would prefer A rather than B.  Now, the corner is still open and after an invasion at C, not whites influence will not be effective.
after the game i was thinking its a wrong direction,maybe h3 was too wide?
janr: White is overconcentrated. I would consider omitting the last defensive move.  Black can run in with A anyway, so closing off the other side is not so big. But in that case, it was better to play B instead of C earlier
janr: I think this move throws away aji here (maybe cutting at A is better later?)
w has too many stones in one place  janr: This black move too feels rather early.  How about just taking a big point in the upper right quarter of the boad?
janr: the kakari at A looks better and safer.
janr: the pincer is natural.
janr:  It is better to just play A.  The advantage is that black gets sente after white defends.
janr: After black's connection at A and white's connection at B, it feels endgame for black to play C.
janr: A feels safer.  B is low, so the potential of the upper side is not large.  On the hand, this extension is easier to cut.
janr: white's cut is painful for black
janr: A is painful but I see no other way (not involving ko) to save the corner.
janr: The only option for black is ko at A.  Black has several threats (marked) and his own groups are very stable.
janr: A avoids complications
janr: first play A.  later lose liberties with the game move if needed.
janr: the stone can be captured in a net
:(  i almost saw b dead but it didnt happen and i couldnt spot mistakes after the s13 cut,so maybe its wrong?
janr: Black is a lot ahead and hence has time to do a very slow move.   I think very big moves are A (threatening the white group with B), C (a light reduction) or D (creating the moyo)
janr: black lets white make territory easily.
If white wants the territory, i think atari from the other direction avoids a black sueeze.
janr: The shape is not ideal due to the many kikashi moves black can make.
b got center and i didnt prevent this
janr: black can not cut white. I'd prefer to play e.g. A
only yose from here
janr: A/B are better
This seemed really unorthidox to me What is the Best 20 Opening moves that you would suggest...  Tuomas: It is actually quite common plan. For amateurs this is used most to prevent the Chinese Fuseki. If you are not familiar with it I recommend studying it a lot. It is very commonly used. That fuseki goes so that white takes the upper left corner and black plays R9 getting so called Chinese enclosure to bottom right corner.
Tuomas:  It is better to take the corner by playing 1. It is big poin in itself and if white plays between it and R16 black can still build nice frameworks and use 2 to harash white.  The rythm of this game is clear, both Black and White play fast moves leaving small openings in their long jumps. Key points are now the upper left corner and right side. Side is important because if black plays there his corner becomes very powerfulll and if white plays his right side group settles nicely.
Tuomas: This is too early in my opinion. Because black made wide corner enclosure this corner is still weak. The obvious black response would be 1. It takes the corner and gives white nice wall towards the righ side. Fair trade but a little passive from black perspective.  I think that 2 looks interesting. Black could plan to treat marked stone lightly and push for right side. This forces white to defend his marked group on the right and black gets time to grab the corner. White will have hard time to make good shape for his group at P16. Perhaps before playing 2 black could close the corner with 3. If white does not defend the bottom right group he will face serious attack sooner or later.
This sort of seemed too slow SO is there other josekis that could be played here Also was playing Counter Hane Appropriate...instead of S16  Tuomas: Slow or solid, nothing bad in that. But shape is a little weak as we see later when white plays the hane at T16.  Black is taking nice bullet proof territoryand white is getting a wall towards his group.   The double hane doesn't look good in my opinion. White gets strong shape from it and the ladder that would capture marked white stones doesn't work well.
Tuomas: white got a nice wall but it has a big hole at 1. Black can also invade this easily by playing somewhere around 2. With third weakness at 3 we can consider this white framework fairly bulnerable.  Black corner is strong so black can attack to 1 right away if he wants to have a dog fight but it is better to use it indirectly.
Tuomas: This builds nicely the upper left side but it also allows white to fortify his right side. I dont like this but it is doable plan. Main fault is that the upper left corner is still open and after this black must get it. Taking the corner is the default move in this situation.
Tuomas: Wrong shape, white should play 1.
Tuomas: These two white stones are not that important.  At the moment they are only 4 points. Black should take the corner or invade somewhere around 2. Corner is better.
Tuomas: This is way too slow for white. He should take the corner or at least form a major framework with 2. This was just 4 point gote that has low priority even on end game.
Tuomas: White shape is bad but so is black. The cut at 1 is dangerous and marked stones are getting heavy.
Tuomas: Here that earlier bad shape plays out. White 1 is common tesuji but here it doesn't work. Instead of this black usually plays at 1 but here there is not so big difference.
Also Is there any I should be focusing on (Black) after defending  Tuomas: White shape is a little too weak for this hane. Black cut at 1 is interesting direct attack but black has to be carefull with his marked stones if he tries that. White should play 1 or some other defensive stone.
Tuomas: Too slow. If black wants to defend this cut he should play A. After that black can either take the corner with or try to attack white with 2 depending on what white does.  Black B is a bad plan because it forces white to fix his shape on the right side.
Tuomas: White framework is getting strength and black shape looks clumsy. If black had played A previously, he would have a lot better position to counter this move. White shape is also bad but this helps it a bit.
would B have been better than A  Tuomas: A is way too slow, it is fundamentally wrong way to use a wall like that. Black should play to corner, but which corner move is correct?  You suggested B but it looks dangerous to me. It invites white to play 1 and for that the only possible move would be pincer. That fight would be good for black so white wont do that. Instead white plays 2 ruining black framework. Now black will have hard time to develop that corner and he wont have any real attack against white.  Here black should play either hoshi at D16 or he could even dare to play E17 or E16. E16 most likely better because it works better against the white bottom left corner. By playing like this black makes sure that if white invades between wall and his corner black will either have very powerfull attack on white or a very large corner.
Tuomas: White took the key point. If black would play around A we could see that Black top side and White right side are more or less equal. And because the last corner is held by white hoshi, white has the advantage.
Tuomas: This is nice direction but perhaps playing between white hoshi stones would be more efficient.
Tuomas: Dangerous attack. White can't settle here and if white continues to play in here this stone becomes heavy group that restricts white playing for the rest of the game.
Tuomas: This is bad idea. By touching white stone you force white to defend it. This way the weakness at 1 gets fixed. It is better to play little closer to the center to force white to defend the center group. Then you can perhaps launch powerfull attack against right side. Capturing the bottom group will be very very hard so better not to count on it.
Tuomas: Dangerous move. I would suggest 1 or some other defensive move. White should aim to build his framework while keeping some presure on black corner so that it wont grow too big.
Tuomas: As we see later in the game this is not the best alternative. The peep at 1 would play nicely with invasion around 2 if black somehow gets central influence to support his attack.
Tuomas: Here white should play 1. It makes his right side framework very strong. The white bottom group should be able to sustain little more presure before it needs to be defended.
Tuomas: Direct attack against this kind of group is useless. It is a lot better to leave the situation open and play elsewhere. Then something might happen that makes your attack more dangerous.
Tuomas: White calmly pushes to center while making eye shape. He has nothing to be afraid at the moment.
Tuomas: The marked white stones look a little funny.
Tuomas: This is big point and now black group is settled.
Tuomas: Again too straightforward. Black could connect his stones with 1 or 2.
Tuomas: Connect and keep yourself strong. Then you can attack sooner or later. This is very bad idea.
Tuomas: White gets nice shape that works fairly well with the upper left corner.
Tuomas: No reason to play like this. Just play 1 and start making huge side framework.
Tuomas: There is one nasty cut left behind but black should be able to live with it. Now he needs to be faster than this. Either approach the corner from 2 or at least jump a little bit further with 3.
Tuomas: Black shape is painfull. White starts to look good again.
Tuomas: Don't peep at cutting point, either cut it or stay clear. If white would plya at 1 the cut would become very dangerous for black. If white cuts directly black should aim to take 1 as soon as possible. The ko fight could cause some problems for him in this way.
Tuomas: This is bad ideay, just connect to maintain your attacking power. Playing like this gives very powerfull attacks for white.
Tuomas: Black would have nice attacking opportunities but his shape is a bit weak. If he attacks his defense will be under heavy strain. The unnecessary ko is giving so much trouble for black.
Tuomas: Deadly move, black canot let marked stones to die, he must protect those. White would like to attack from 1 but that way groups would run across the board and his bottom side group could get in trouble so this is better.
Tuomas: White calmly keeps his stones under control.
I would suggest 1 instead. It cuts the white center group from its only support and puts it under severe attack. There will be little fighting in center but white should be able to handle it. During that fight black should make sure that he lives with the weak group on the left and ruins all territory that white might get on left side.
I think white should have played at M9  Is it better  Tuomas: Correct. That is the key point to break black shape.
Tuomas: Here black fortified the white side and almost forced white to connect his weak center group to safety. Black stones don't make any territory and dont really cut anything so it is very bad result for black.   The earlier cut at 1 would have been better. Black could still try something in that direction.
Tuomas: Fairly weak move. White can connect his weak group by playing somewhere around 1 and there is hole in black wall that makes it hard for black to get points from here. If he plays 2 now white can still develop his corner by playing around 4 to counter it.  Black could still try to cut with 1 although it is very hard fight for him now. If not that then he needs to protect the weak group at 3.
Tuomas: White shape is bad but this does little to fix it. There are still lot of important moves waiting.
Tuomas: Running is usually good alternative for connecting, but here having running group makes it hard for white to get more territory from upper left corner and left side. It is better to connect to bottom group and focus on gaining more points.
Is there better BIG moves that I can makes if so please explain...  Tuomas: The big move would be 1 because that way black top side would have more room to grow. But that would leave the weak black group in bad situation. The connection between marked black stones is a little thin so white should try to attack it now that his groups are strong.  White could perhaps try to attack with 2 or some similar move. Very tricky situation.
Tuomas: This exchange hurts white corner. Now he wont be able to make as much territory there. White should try to cut at 1.
Tuomas: Perhaps 1 would be better. Or even 2.
Tuomas: White cut at 1 is dangerous.
Tuomas: This is over cautious. White has lot of interesting alternatives.
Tuomas: Connect at 1 to avoid nasty ko fight.
Tuomas: Never play this kind of ko. Connect. You have nothing to win and everything to lose and you can get out from the situation very easily.  But lets pause here to analyze the weakness at 1. Check the basic variation for it.
Tuomas: Not enough, white will play 1 to start a ko that can win a game for him. This will have interesting effect to white framework though.
Tuomas: Instead of this white should have escalated the ko with 1. Or defend against 2.  Lets see the basic variation now that black has the marked stone.
Tuomas: This is the point where the weakness at 1 activates. Let see how it looks like now. (Variation start from white killing black center group.)   Do I need to say that saving that center group would be very good move?
There are a few Variations that I put in With A so if there is any improvements that I could make On Letting the Black Group Live after A or Killing the White Group on right corner ... Please Look at my varations and see if any errors.. Thank you   Tuomas: Obviously this is not the big weakness in white framework. And there is one 26 point move on board that should decide the game for white. It is very hard to tell what is the best move for white in next black attack. White will lose something so it is all about controlling the damage and maintaining sente.
K This is where I was sort of confused A and B both were Appealing to me  Tuomas: If you play B situation is the same as before but white has one liberty more. White wins the semeai thanks to damezumari that prevents black from taking the last liberty.
K there I thought B would be better for me if i wanted to win the game. But I wasn't sure SO i went with A and lost at yose... Please Respond to this question  Tuomas: Here black can use atari to gain one more freedom, which makes the basic situation back into ko. Black has local ko threat and white loses the ko. So white cant play the basic variation and he must try to limit his losses. I don't study the white moves that much. I just show that he can't fully block the black attack.
Tuomas: Ko for one point while there is that 26 points floating. Ko-threats marked.
Tuomas: Obviously this should have been played long time ago.
Tuomas: Nothing in here.
you cared more about two points that ten to thirty. connecting at 72 is a yose move  look at playing at Q10 or even at R15 the idea here is to counter the power of black 63-71, and how to do so is use all of your power ie. all the white stones along the fourth line. you should be able to place a move 72 at K15 and connet it to the fourth line. that is a lot of power that the white stones have in the upward direction.
move 136 i would say is the losing move black has two weak groups the 63-71 and the 73-75 black stones v. whites stronge 74-86 and 32-70 stones.
what you did was make black stronger which in the end allowed him to get the big moyo which let him get the that huge 111 points i would suggest to you, to begin to understand the power of stones and the direction the power flowes
P: Low Chinese opening vs Sanren Sei!  I am curious the book get strong at the opening suggest that white play A (Q10) instead of B (K4). Then black C (C10) White B (K4).  It is a very small difference but I am curious to know if you have any opinions on the best way to proceed in this opening.  In the actual game it seemed to me that black C to answer white B   was more natural than black A then giving white a chance at C.  R: This move is playable for white. White has many options for her third move. Besides the one played and Q10, white could play at (1) or (2). Both a and c are valid as a next move for black- it is a matter of personal preference.
P: Too soon by white without preparatory moves? If it is too soon for white, I did not punish white very well :(  R: This move is not optimal for white. I would prefer to approach at Q13.
P: I try to stay consistent with a moyo style of play  R: This is a mistake. Black should attach (see variation).
R: This is also a mistake. See variation.
P: I struggled to find the best way to answer this splitting move, any suggestions are most welcome.  R: This is an interesting idea for white, although it is an overplay.
P: I try to split white myself and get my group out...  R: This is a good response.
R: This move is a mistake in direction. See variation.
R: Black still needs to jump at A. B is a better move locally, as it threatens to connect to the C11 stones.
R: Black should connect at A instead.
R: Last chance for Black to connect.
P: White has split black and can still run out in the center... Disapointing for black, but I am not sure what else I could do?  A running battle begins... any advice is welcome.
R: B still needs to jump out to A. The two stones you are saving are not as important.
R: When you contact a weak stone, you are only helping your opponent.
P: It took me some time before deciding on tenuki, still not sure this was best, but I did not feel I had a good attacking prospects against white.  R: If you are unsure how to continue, sometimes tenuki is best. It's hard to say tenuki here is bad, but I would prefer to continue attacking at A.
R: This move is very slow. Black should punish white for ignoring him in the lower right corner.
R: Too slow
R: White should tenuki here.
P: At this stage I felt white was doing well with a huge moyo at the bottom. Was this move too slow by black? It seemed necessary to me :)  R: Some of your previous moves were too slow, but this one is a good move.
R: Again this is too slow. Look for ways to enter the white moyo at the bottom while keeping up pressure on this group. You could consider any of the marked moves.
P: Not sure why white played this move?
P: first step at a mild reduction  R: Too mild : )
R: Good
P: looking back it seemed white got more out of the exchange after  the moves in the bottom left.  R: Well, black made several slow moves which helped to solidify white (marked with the X's). Without these moves in place, black would still have ways of entering the moyo. The exchange in the bottom left was fair locally.
R: This is an overplay, and it really shouldn't live. If you are going to make a move like this, you need to do so before solidifying your opponent.
P: I did not see much useful follow up in the bottom left, so I switched elsewhere on the board.  Maybe I can use the aji of the 2 stones later, not sure how though.
P: the sacrifice at A (Q9) seemed like a good trade for black to get a moyo in the upper right. Now I believe balck has a chance to win.
R: Good. When you make moves that are this forecful, it is hard for your opponent to ignore them.
R: See variation.
P: lucky for black white elected to defend.
R: See variation. Black can kill the white group here.
P: Bad from black, I did not know what to do Black A (S12) was probably better. The game seems tight.  I am also disapointed I could not get much more out of the aji of the  black triangled stones, perhaps there was nothing better.  R: D1 would be the biggest move at this point.  Overall, black played a good game. The forecful play in the upper right enabled black to secure a victory. In terms of improving, I would suggest studying attack and defense, and working on maintaining sente by not playing slow moves. Otherwise, I belive black has very solid fundamentals.
P: not sure white had to play here at this stage.  [END OF COMMENTS]
************* I have been trying this opening lately. Usually white comes in at D10 or C10. Then the extension to c7 or c8 is better than if the f3 stone is at e3 - less concentrated (I think). See variation.  BB: Hmm, I don't know. Obviously, this move tries to make more territory than e3. And obviously, it is thinner. The shimari with e3 really dominates the left side, and this one slightly less so. The weakness of this shimari is d3, and White can actually invade there later, especially if there is a white stone on the bottom side to run to.  If you want to be efficient on the left side, your extension would be at c10 or d10. However, I'm guessing you don't get that chance.
***************  It seems this is wrong, as the top or either side is bigger.  ***************  BB: Absolutely, positively. This is a bad move.
BB: Okay, this is truly great for you. You are winning right now. This stone works perfectly for you, with your somewhat thin encolsure in the corner. One thing to note right now is that White h3 / Black j3 is starting to look like double sente, because the extension by either player has a follow-up invasion. This should be part of your thinking right now.
***********************  Again, this seems too small and the side or top seems bigger.  BB: Yes, I think it's slightly too early, but not by much. Are you going to ignore it and left White steal your corner with d3?
BB: Okay you are. Still, this gives White the chance to settle here in sente, and dive in to d3.  By the way, why so far from White? I think if he plays r5 here, he gets a big corner and you're still not safe. See var.
BB: White is offering you the corner. I think you should take it, with r3. See var.
BB: See var.
BB: This is just plain odd. What is it trying to achieve? o17 is making it hard to get territory above, and the corner below is wide open.  Your next move has to be to invade the corner. If you think of it as trying to save r7, White will get a lot of territory and strength and you will live small or run away.
BB: It just gets weirder. I assume you're sacrificing r7. But it won't work so well. q16 will take a lot of killing. This move certainly doesn't do it. White has support at p9/r9 too. But r7 doesn't take a lot of killing. r5 might do it.  But that's just half of it. Look how big your territory will be if you take the top right. Compare that to the bottom right if White wins it.
BB: This is just great for White. You've got two weak groups now. Maybe three. White's not really weak anywhere.  I think your best bet here is r11, because it makes a bit of a group, and at the same time threatens to connect to r7.
BB: I know what you're gettin at here - you're threatening to take the corner. It's not bad. If White r17 next, your r11 is quite good. But it doesn't make a base in itself, nor any territory. And White can just play elsewhere now.
************  At the time this seemed odd to me as the corner was still invadeable at 3-3. However, the bottom territory is large as result of such an invasion, so looking back I see this was white's plan all along.  ********************  BB: Nice idea, wrong move. You can take the corner, possibly in sente. If there's tettitory to the left of p6 and above l3, it will be *very* easy to reduce from the outside. What White should do is play r5. It protects the corner and practically captures r7. White would be very happy for Black to start throwing good stones after bad with p7 (White could simply reply at o4).
BB: Perfect. Where is White's territory now?
BB: I think I'd block on the other side. If r7, the White stones around there will be weak.
BB: White should actually play elsewhere here. This move is gote. You can play r17 now, and have four corners, strong groups, and leave White with *very* little.  Finding these opportunities to take sente, and crystalise your advantage, are incredibly important for winning Go.
BB: Gote. Black should leave this and play r17. See var.
BB: Gote. White should play elsewhere. See var.
BB: Gote. Black should play elsewhere. See var.
**************  While the bottom is large, its all white has - I feel I am ahead. Is this a correct assesment?  I think the next move is a mistake. I should have played E5.  BB: White takes sente. I'll take a punt and say this is the winning move. It's not a great move locally, but *it's not in the lower right corner*, and that's probably all that matters.
BB: This is okay. You should probe at o2 at some stage.
***************** I knew white was building up a large center, but I felt this was a bit difficult for him.  To reduce targets of attack, I secured the right hand group with R17, which also threatens to connect the O17 stone- rather large I thought. However, this allows possiblities in the lower left.  BB: I think your response to this is okay. If White plays r17 now, it gets hard for you.
BB: This is gote. White should treat his stones here lightly. They're not going to die!
*********** Sacrifice O17 for side territory. But white didn't do this.  BB: Consider g7 instead. Because White g7 is a really interesting move.
BB: Hmm, White should really play g7. Attack Black k7, and at the same time make strength with which to attack the left. See variation.
BB: Good! A nice solid, simplifying move. The corner is strong now.
BB: Kind of pointless. White could try something like j8.
***************  This invasion worked very well for white. Anything I should have done differently to respond? As I mentioned before, I should have moved out at E5 earlier.  **********  BB: No it didn't. Those three stones could still die. And by getting in there, White has given away territory both above and below.
*************** I felt trying to cut off the left stones rather than helping in the center would have given white too big an area. Is this correct?  BB: I'd probe at o2 first. See var.  But yes, you're right to save k7. If White plays k9, it would be very big.
**************** Goal here is to live locally while reducing white's gains here. I mostly succeeded, so I'm surprised at how close the game becomes.
BB: This isn't a light move. Try h4 instead.
BB: Too small. Something like n5 increases your eye space and reduces at the same time. The move played helps White get stronger. You don't really have to take gote to live here anyway. You can still run. See var.
************* Perhaps Black should have played around C14 instead of pushing at L4? - The invasion was bad here.  ************
BB: This move just doesn't do anything. It doesn't really threatening anything, nor particularly strengthen Black.
******************* This was well timed by white.  ******************  BB: You made it pretty easy for him.
***********************  Fearing for my two stones, which if captured would give White the left side, I try reach out to them and develop the top at the same time. This result turned out poorly for me.  *******************  BB: This doesn't save them. If White wants them, he'll paly something like e13 here. See variation on next move.  Try d13 instead. See var.
BB: Try h17 instead. You're strong, White is strong. Help out o17 and k17 instead.
****************** While the left became territory for me, white's top is almost as big, and considering the advantage I had here, this is a loss. The K17 stone is also in danger.
************* I am still uncomfortable with the center situation, and seek to secure these stones in sente, or at least so white pays a price. *********  BB: You need to be more comfortable with being uncomfortable. But you can probably get something here anyway. Try n4. See var. Actually, just play n17. It's huge.
*********** Center is Ok now. This move is big for me, helps make some territory up top and attacks the top white group (though not very strongly).  ***********  BB: Centre is no better than before. A move like m7 is still painful. And you gave away points, and aji. But n17 is very good. You won because you got this point.
******************* I see little alternative than submissively responding. These stones aren't strong enough to not respond.  *****************
********* Mistake? I was worried about the life of the M17 group. But It seems to be rich in alternatives.  BB: Yeah, it's a mistake. Don't fool yourself into thinking it's sente. You're safe, but even if you weren't, a move like k12 would do a lot more for you. And yeah, in terms of big, r12 is great.
BB: Actually you can just capture s11 instead.
*********** This begins a long fight for center territory for both of us. I got more than I thought here, and while white get some good area, considering his initial investment, it is not much.  *************  BB: Don't think of it as a fight. You're just playing some endgame moves here.
BB: There ends the fight, insofar as there was any. a5 is probably best now. In terms of gote, f11 is big. f9 might also work. See variations.
BB: White should just ignore this. See var.
BB: Solid is better. See variation.
************* Any comments about this skirmishing would be welcome. *******  BB: f11 is bigger.
BB: This doesn't do anything. You can try d7 instead. See var.
BB: Play b3 instead.
BB: This is very big.
BB: You should try to win this ko. At least play e17 as a ko threat!
*********** I was mad white got this. ***********  BB: Of course.
xxc2 : i hope you understand you may read this after xxc1 :)  i show here what B needs with is first move
xxc2 : according previous comment we have 1&2 and A&B ... then lower left seems the target here
Artigas: I like to do this opening (R16, Q3), but then I don't know if it is better to play P17 or R 10.  xxc1 : what is B waiting for R16/Q3 ? R16 is to get a chance to add P17 fast and get a strong living corner (same for Q5 with R5) and then (if possible) extend along the side facing the "shimari", Q10 (and K4 here) first the corner ... but witch one ? looking at both with standard path, i think you'll found both interesting, then ...
xxc2 : both right B stones are low ... perhaps a pincer ?
[Artigas] Here I am thinking to extend on the lower side. I also thought of attacking upper white stones, P10, or approach white corners.  xxc1: keeping  upper W group for later seems a good idea P10 is big, but quite slow right now  perhaps E3 here ?
[Artigas] OK, white invades, I am thinking about P12 as an alternative.  xxc1 : just pushing this stone seems ok P10, Q11 ... from the weak group, or Q13 from the strong one (against all "rules") to get a strong  move from R10  i do not think it was a good idea to touch at Q12, W can hurt now with fight
[Artigas] I am thinking of making a base and attacking at the same time.  xxc1 : good
[Artigas] White attacks the corner, I am thinking I will make him heavy.  xxc1 : and what about a submissive move here ? P3 ? W still not have a base and a strong group over the head
[Artigas] Trying to separate white stones...
[Artigas] Is this a mistake? I am thinking I will make outside influence while chasing white, but am walking into a hit on the head. Maybe I shoul attack from the other side? P8? Or maybe O3, securing capture, and then concentrate on another part of the board?  xxc1 : it seems ok, P8 no, and O3 too small this way W still had his problem for life and B start to build a really strong and big lower side ... it's ok i think
xxc2 : time to play elsewhere and think big i think
xxc2 : here again ... larger moves all over the board
[Artigas] Thinking about this afterwards, it feels like an unnecessary move at this point in the game...I still want to attack the group, but unable to see how to make the most prifit out of this...and maybe I should concentrate on another part of the board at this stage.  xxc1 : righ no need to play this stone righ now to go on with the attack ... an other question : how can white live ?  in the corner ? ... seems difficult to get 2 eyes, T4 needed and then a B move, this will let only one (possible) eye can W cut and kill something near ? mmm, don't think so  so the way is from the outside ... B had the choice from righ or lower group, lower seems better choice, less B stones
xxc2 : again ...
xxc2 : ...
[Artigas] Now I am trying to make my way to the center...but I think I could have made much more profit on the lower side, and the battle is just happening on "my" corners...the other two corners are left alone.  xxc1 : walking for the center is for escape when there is no more chance to live ... no need here  you are right, but B gets more cash right now
[Artigas] Now I am finally moving over to this side.  xxc1 : it's ok
[Artigas] Trying to make a base...  xxc1: good, but seems too small, W gets more profit here
[Artigas] It made sense to me at the time to move for the center...but now I am not sure whether I should have been better off attacking the corners...this group is quite safe as it is, right? Are F17 or F3 good alternatives?  xxc2 : this one for what ?
[Artigas] Now I am seeing that upper side is very white, so I need to move in...  xxc1 : seems dangerous to enter here now, W strong at left side
[Artigas] I decided to jump here in order not to be crowded. I thought of F16, but was afraid of white counter at K17, or thereabout.  xxc1 : a chance, F16 and K/J17 too easy for W
[Artigas] Trying to secure life in the corner...  xxc1: you have to ...
[Artigas] OK, I thought I needed to answer here...but can white make much territory here anyway? Maybe it is better to approach with Q3?  xxc1: W is reducing here, look at the cut(s) and protect is the only way to answer here i think
[Artigas] Securing life for my group, but in a very low position...now I am hoipng to reduce white territory with F6, rather than approaching the corner...and maybe I should just do C3?  xxc1 : C3 instead of F2? i do not think F2 is ok
[Artigas] In retrospect, This feels like an unnecessary move at this stage...I think I should have gone to the upper left...F15? E15? or maybe E18 followed by E16?
[Artigas] Now the corner seems larger for white...  xxc1 : right
[Artigas] Now I am jsut trying to destroy white territory...  xxc1 : it's endgame now ...
[Artigas] Maybe just H15, instead of H14+H15?  xxc1 : doesn't change anything, both are gote
[Artigas] Walked into that one...some points more for white...some points less for black...  xxc1 : L12 instead of K11 ?
[Artigas] Again, maybe just O12, instead of O13+O12?  xxc1 : right same thing
[Artigas] Here I know that white wants to put my group in atari, forcing P3, and I am afraid of some combination in the corner that may give seki...  xxc1 : right, dangerous
You can check your score with the score command, type 'done' when finished. Click on a group of stones to mark it dead and remove it from the board.  xxc1 : well this first part is done no big mistakes on fight or life&death, end game seems better for B, but something is missing  ... i think it is the most difficult thing to understand : when to switch local/global i'll show some way with xxc2 now  xxc2 : i think it is the key for B ... get a better use of all the board from the beginning  hope this fun way to comment in 2 steps doesn't disturb you too much, and help you all  thank u for reading
this move is fine though personally i like to attack an opponents corner...
although this is a big point, now would be the time to attack somewhere on the marked points. Its important to attack from this side to profit from your stones on the lower side. Your move looks a little bit too passive to me.
too early for white, somewhere around R6 would have been better for the same reasons as stated before. This is a move which black can be thankful for because while it makes it easy for black to gain territory while attacking this weak white stone, white has to struggle to get a base.
regarding the circumstances this is too passive. Black can make use of the stone at B and play for example like in the variation and white is in trouble.
correct move, hane at the head of two!
mistake by white, a responce to J5 is absolutely necessary. By playing R6 he invites a serious attack on his G3 group later on and risks being imprisoned.
this jump came one move too early
bad move, white can tear black apart if he wants to. The marked white group still is not connected. If white intends to take black eyespace away and attack the whole group S12 would be the move
wrong move i think, better come out at Q8 and try to cut
no need for that yet, white wont waste a move securing that corner right now. More urgent is either to attack the lower group or to play Q8 and cut white. at this point i would always prefer black to white, because blacks position is more solid all over the board. White should get punished for leaving such weak groups lying around
perhaps it is better here to take the corner with S19 instead of connecting
now lets consider the outcome of the invasion of the corner. While black gets at most 3-4 points, white gets a huge wall on the outside which relates nicely with the two stones at A and B. This is a desaster for black.  If black has to invade it should rather be done like in the variation although it should be left for later as white gets a pretty strong position here too.
nicely done, black is building a good moyo.
you had the right idea to imprison white here. This truly must hurt :)
this invasion is way too deep. should make life easy for black
NEVER (or at least nearly never) attack a single stone (or a weak group for that matter) through attaching a stone. This only invites fighting and the weak attacked stone will profit. The correct way is to attack from distance and take territory and influence elsewhere while the attacked group has to run away.
much too small. There are lots of bigger points to play. Most urgent still is something like Q8
bad shape.If you want to make eyes play at A.
black should have never allowed white to connect down there.   Now this move doesnt do anything. Black has to lessen whites influence on the top, my preferred move would be A
too passive this way you wont hardly make any territory. Playing somewhere in front of a big wall of yours and hoping to get points is the wrong strategy. Thickness can only be use to attack, the territory comes as a byprodukt
this way of playing made it easy for white, he secures a huge territory on the top.
count the liberties and you will see that white doesnt even have to react, so this move is wasted.
Thanks for reviewing my game! (black)  * Hi. I hope my comments and variations will be useful.
Is low move an okay response?  * Yes.
How should I punish white for ignoring finishing off his shape?  * It's important to separate the two groups. A move like C6 would be wrong.
* This is OK.
This seemed a bit low, and I would eventually get cut.  * Yes, this isn't good. I think A is a good move here.
This move looks strange. C6 instead creates eye shape and can never be cut.
The left group is in danger, so you should play A for example.
Sacrificing the group is not a good idea, because J5 becomes strong. Instead, you should escape at A.
A is possible.
Not sure what a good response was. I decided to put pressure on his group while jumping out at the same time. Perhaps loose pincer would have been better.  * A pincer at A puts more pressure on his stone. If you want to jump out, a cap at B looks better.
* This move is really bad. It threatens the cut at C11, but even if white could not play D9, he would defend the cut at A or B which would result in a very bad exchange.
* White is very strong now.
This leaves a dangerous cut at G17, so it's better to extend.
Perhaps I finished off wrong side. Invites a cut.  * I agree.
This exchange is not good, because it weakens your left group. Instead, you should just extend to A.
He invaded quite deeply, perhaps I should have capped him or something.  * This move doesn't really attack O17. It doesn't attack J15 either, because White has F16.
* A is a very big move, that takes a big corner territory and attacks the white stones.
* A works.
* A works.
Painful tesuji. Probably would have won if I had killed his group. Oh well, I'll learn to read better from this I suppose.  * Yes, you would have won. The snapback is a really basic tesuji which is essential to know in order to become stronger.
* This is small.
If I responded at M10 instead, could he have cut off my entire group at the bottom?  * No.
* This is a mistake. Now White can make a ko at J7.
I live! but from here on, his corners add up to be too much, since his right group lived and his corners were more or less stable territory.
* You can play A. But i don't think it's enough. The game seems to be over now.   I enjoyed reviewing your game and hope it is useful.
This move is perfectly normal, it aims to keep Black on the right side and not expand his moyo.  Just make a shimari, it's the easiest.
I don't agree with this move because you are making him stronger while it is not clear that your right side will be big.  R9 is low so you can be reduced with A.
This move I don't understand it's the wrong shape.
This doesn't make use of his bad shape but it's not a bad move.
He fixed his shape ugh.
Good.
You missed a vital spot here.
Now White get's a lot stronger.
Weird.
You have to pick this hane.
A is going to be painful for you.
Well you have to play something like k16 to make your stones have any use, but you are a bit overconcentrated, which is why you should not have let white p10, he wouldn't have had time to just invade the corner.
This move makes no sense.
This is a good move, you could also approach the bottom.
Wrong direction.
There's no reason for you to play in this area at all, plus this move strengthens White.
W is weird
I can't beleive a 1 kyu played this, this is almost like passing.
Small plus bad shape.  If White gets a stone at A he has the B-D sequence so it's bad aji.
Even smaller.  Yeah he can cut but that's not important right now.
I don't understand this.
You could be more active.
Wow weird.
TH: Spiltting move.  This is possible I suppose but the kosumi in this situation is strange.  Easier to just jump.
This move is very bad, you are allowing him to reverse his mistake.
TH: definately let me off lightly.  No, this is the right direction, the bottom is worth points.
Painful for you.
Good.
I would have left this.
White came out ahead and he shouldn't have.
This move is huge.
Here it comes.
This obviously doesn't work.
This is a problem now.
Slow.
Good.
Why wasn't your first instinct to connect?
Good move.
?
nick2006 [5k]: Hello, Good luck and have fun.
Should This move have been played at D17?  Long: Can be, but not necessarily. Anyway, it is just the beginning of the game, and different people will have different preferrences. P17 is no "wrong" spot. Just keep on your track!
Long: White Can also consider R10. That is what I would usually prefer. However, White seems to be tempting to play this move when he plays D15.
Long: B chose an immediate invasion. If B does not wish to play here, he may also...
Long: Seems a 'loose' move here to me. Just as an alternatives, W can also...
Long: I have a little doubt about this move. See variations...
Long: I'd leave this step or...
Long: B's corner is not big, and is sealed inside.
I think this got me into trouble.  I think it might have been better to just play R10 or Q 10  Long: Nope, this move is OK. But I'm thinking of A instead. Possibly better?
Long: Now B seems to be in trouble. But W's shape is not good either.
Long: Not necessary.
Long: Bad! Must block at "A".
Long: Not B is safe.
Long:  Slow.
Long: B missed the chance.
This was really bad.  Long: Yup. Helping W to correct his mistake.
Long: Why not just give up those 4 useless stones and play "A"?
Long: I seldom see these moves. Interesting.
Long: An overplay to me.
Long: Slow. Play near "A" instead.
Long: W Cannot get too much territory with weaknesses at A B C D E F G. Howeverm B must make sure he is strong, so...
Long: Now Q10 cut is serious. And B corner is not stable.
Long: Important.
Long: Can be the losing move.
Long: !!!
Long: ....
Long: ?
Long: Bad!
Long: Sticking at A is better if you do not know how to kill W.
Long: Dead or Alive time!
Long: Maybe yoo early. B also has weaknesses at A and B.
whoops  Long: whoops x 2
Long: After this it's hard for B.
maybe cut at E7?  Long:
At this point it seems really hard for black  Long: And the reason is the cut at D6.
Long: The game is concluded now. No more comment beyond this point. However, you can still ask if you have any doubts later.  Combact skill and clear eyes, open mind!  Long 19/08/20008
Kashomon [5k]: thx nick2006 [5k]: Thanks for the game
JT: White could also play A or B.
JT: I would Prefer black A instead.
JT: See variation from node 5 (the previous one).
JT: White could also think of playing Q4 to gain influence on the lower side. This joseki (see the variation) is quite tricky though as it is also known as the Great Avalanche joseki. I put two simple variations that would be good for white.   The Joseki black selected in the game works well for black.
JT: I think this joseki slightly favors black because of the marked stone. White would like to get sente to approach the lower right corner, but getting it is difficult. I might have considered to play the Q5 approach to Q4.
JT: Black usually plays one these three.  The C is possible because black has R16 stone but it may end up to a difficult fight. See variations to A & C.
JT: Safe play for white. Otherwise black A would give white poor result.
JT: I would have considered one of the presented variations.
JT: This is rather poor defence for white. Black plays either O17 or N17 causes problems for white. My point is that if you want to defend going towards the corner would be better, See variations from the previous node.   Tenuki is also worth considering that is to approach the lower left corner. The P16 stone  is not totally lost as long as the corner is open.
JT: Big point for black. Direct pincer is worth considering for white.
JT: Nice double attack from black. White problems are caused by the side group that got out. See the variation from node 25.
JT: The problem with this move is that you are driving black towards your weak stones (that is the marked stones do not have decent base).   Maybe just living in the corner as a white. See variations from node 35.
JT: Black has possibility to kill white see the variations.
JT: This move also kills white :-) See the variations from node 76.
JT: Blacks mistake. Black A works for black. See the variations from previous node.
JT: Before white answers this there are quite big sente moves that could be taken first see the variations.
JT: At least now these sentes should be played before taking the big gote.
JT: White can cut the marked stones now. See the variation.
The cutting point in G4 works still for white...
le komoku dans cette direction est il correct ? @ komoku in this direction is it correct ? (LL)  You may be correct here but it is not something for us to worry about. Maybe this will affect pros but certainly not amateurs :-) It does make more logical sense to play the other way to me though.
noir prend logiquement la bonne extension laissée par blanc @ logically, black takes the good extension given by white... (LL)   I did a search on gobase for this and there were 100's of pro games with this exact position so nothing much to worry about =)
It is awkward for white here. But that doesn't mean bad. I would not be at all surprised to see a pro just dive in to the corner as they can cope quite well with moyo's.   If you are worried about the global position maybe it is better to play C6 as a wedge at C10. This way no moyo can be formed.  I would not be a fan of B here. A seems ok. My other thoughts are these C, D, E. D is a bit extreme and almost certainly not optimal in a pro game. However, if you have a problem with moyo's it is a sure way to limit them at little cost.
un des 'joseki' possibles, mais noir va pouvoir prendre un avantage global... @one of the possible 'joseki' , but black will be able to take a global advantage... (LL)  This does leave the potential to grow the moyo. I wouldnt call it bad, but if you are scared of moyo maybe its not optimal.
In this position black should play A. He has pincered on that side and his potential moyo is that way. To let you in by blocking at B is a big error.
White should be happy here. The black wall to the lower side does not make much sense.  If I was playing here I would cut with B. The cut will give you a group which will not be weak and will reduce potential moyo. He will be too busy settling himself on the bottom too attack you severely so hopefully you can get sente for C17.  See var
sort du 'joseki' habituel afin de gagner l'initiative... @ do not follow the usual 'joseki' to take the initiative... (LL)
Taking sente in this way is ok, but lacks some fighting spirit. Still I think the game is good for white. D3 was too bad so far.
This is probably your first mistake. This move is too close to the thickness. It is good to make the black wall useless, but in a way this gives it a chance to work. Blacks next move should be at A, pushing you towards the thickness.  See vars for other options to J3.
This answer is a bit passive makes the attack at A more severe also.  I would prefer to answer D2 with B.
Good move.
The only answer.
Ok.
As black is strong here. I might try P3 just to make him overconcentrated.
This move is painful for white.  The left side is uninteresting due to the low marked move. White wants to be playing in the upper left instead.
This move is ok. Moyo getting big though.  See alternative plan with tenuki..
comment réduire le moyo noir ??? @ how to reduce black's moyo ??? (LL)
le moyo noir est grand, et, le manque de solidité du groupe "triangle" empêche blanc d'attaquer trop profond... @ black's moyo is big... and the lack of thickness of "triangle" group does not permit white to attack deeply... (LL)
blanc ne peut guère assez plus loin ?!... @ white cannot go deeper ?! (LL)  This move is a bit too "obvious" to me. It only has one purpose which is to reduce the moyo. It is better to try to be more active in your reduction as shown in var.
This move is solid. aybe a little too solid for black. J11 more interesting.
Annoying for you to have to keep jumpng but seems only way.
I think this is maybe not urgent. The good thing about black playing J13 is you know he wants points now. This means all your reductions are sente.
Its big
I think you must play this/
How about C?
Usually defending like this is too slow.  If you need to defend then you should have played O18 yourself in the first place.
This move is huge overplay =)
The game line is perfect by white. Black is just dead.
This is big. Black should not have got this as it was your sente to play ABCD before this move.
I think this black move is ok.
la bonne forme pour vivre... vue dans des parties de pro ! @ the good shape to live... seen in some pro game ! (LL)  Yes, it is good, but the other way is not dead ;-)
CZR: Maybe 'A' instead?  But why?  s: I like your move better - it's tighter and projects influence.  Your first stone here is on the star point, so you're not expecting to gain territory.  A is more territorial since it's on the third line, but also looser because it's farther away.
s: This is good, although I find A to be easier personally.
s: Terrible timing.  This is much too small for so early in the game.   I follow Janice Kim's advice on the opening - "rush to plant your flag."  That means you should find the biggest open part of the board and be the first to play there.  In this position I think A and B are screaming for stones!
CZR: It didn't appear to me that I could kill the corner.  I was happy with the result however as b gets surrounded in sente.  s: Black's shape is terrible, but I think you're doing fine even if you don't kill here.  You have all the influence.
CZR: Trying to extend a good distance from marked stones.  s: Too small.  I think moves around A, B or C are all much bigger.  D is better too.  This move is cramped.
s: Nice.
CZR: I thought this approach was natural with the bottom left corner.  Comments?  s: Yes, this is perfect.
CZR: Would invading into the corner have been better?  See variation.  I chose this move because I thought this applied pressure to b's stone.  s: Yes, good move.
CZR: Applying pressure to b while expanding my corner.
s: Hmmm - this invites problems.  I think I'd extend to A.  A primary rule is to keep your opponents stones separated.  You're asking to be cut here and giving black a chance to fight for connection.
CZR: Wasn't sure what move to make at this point.  It seems as though more pressure could be applied to b's marked group.  In the game I thought to exchange 'A' for 'B' to strengthen my group and then go back to attacking below.  s: I like this - it makes a strong base for your group and is probably sente.
CZR: Maybe 'A' is better.  s: I really, really don't like this or A.  Both are very small - less than 10 points I think.  B is very really urgent now - it's the last big open space so whoever plays first gets a big advantage.
CZR: This move felt like too much too me.  So I tried to expose b's weakness in the 2 space jump.  I believe I made technical errors however.  Please show where things went wrong in the next exchange for w.  s: This looks like a great move to me - it aims to build a huge moyo and restricts your moyo, a dual-purpose move.  Maybe it would be better at A, a little faster.
CZR: I'm not sure about this move.  s: Yes, this is nasty.  The shape you end up with is just terrible.
s: Black should be more severe - A for the double atari.
s: black is kind - he makes you make terrible shape and then he has pity and makes terrible shape himself!  The marked stones are the dreadful "empty triangle".
CZR: I played this in order to lead up to a reduction along the top.  s: ok.
s: This a good move, but maybe a little timid.  I think A is better.  Black's corner isn't complete - you can play there and expect to live with ease.
s: Now black has the double-wing formation and invading around A will take finesse to pull off.  Usually that means you need some kind of threat to escape out to live.
CZR: I'm trying to pressure both groups no that I feel my group at the top is fine.  s: I like it.  Keep the groups separated and one should die.
CZR: I'm happy to extend knowing it weakens b's upper group and strengthens my own.
s: ok, but I think extending down at A is stronger.
CZR: An outright attack on b.  s: Good.
CZR: To prevent b from connecting two groups.  s: I don't think you needed this.
CZR: Turning from the bottom, I looked for the biggest move I could find.  s: Not bad.  The defect at A makes this smaller than it could be, but as it turns out black doesn't notice.
CZR: I'm trying to exploit 'A', extend from my wall and form a moyo with my thickness above.  s: What is there at A to exploit?  Black can live below if you cut him off, I expect.
s: Ok, black called your bluff.  He also doesn't think there's anything at A to exploit!
CZR: Here I try to cut black off.  First, is this the right idea and second, is this the right execution.  s: Yes, right idea.  I think this moves is ok.
CZR: I'm trying to take away eye space.
CZR: I don't want to see my upper stones get disconnected in the fighting.
CZR: Maybe 'A' is better?  s: B looks like the vital point to me.  Black is dangerously close to making two eyes, I don't think you can aford to play loose.
CZR: Is the cross cut better?  See variation.  s: hard to say - but this looks like black should be able to make two eyes, so I'd say try the cut.
CZR: Black has escaped.  Better technique would have ended the game already I think.  s: Yes, I think you could have killed black, but you did well anyway.
s: This move is "aji-keshi" - meaning you're taking away future potential and getting nothing in return.  This move could at least be a great ko threat later.  As it is you play it and gain nothing.
s: so tiny...  big moves around the edges are still available - A, B, C.  One thing I've learned is that the little fighting moves in the middle towards the end of the middle game aren't usually worth very much.  If you're playing a move that's only worth 2 or 3 points you should instead look for an end-game move like A or B.  It's probably worth a lot more!
s: Way, way too small.  If that's worth 2 points in gote I'd be surprised!
s: Wasted move.
CZR: Is the variation better?  s: I don't think so, but it should be easy for you to count and find out for sure.
CZR: Didn't have time to read this out fully during the game.  And I felt I was far enough ahead that I could spare a move.  s: I think you didn't need it, but there's nothing wrong with a defensive move when you're way ahead!  You're at least 20 points ahead here.
CZR: At this point, I figured w probably missed the play at 'A', so I saved it for later.
CZR: Just make two eyes.
CZR: ??  s: we all make mistakes in reading....
CZR: I really don't think this is necessary either.  s: Not at all.
s: Even worse!
Black resigns.  s: Good game.  You clearly beat black in hand-to-hand combat in the middle game, and in life-or-death in the end-game.  You have a good grasp of how to separate stones and attack.  s: I think your biggest weakness is in the opening - you need to be more aggressive and try hard to figure out what the biggest move is.  Also, in the later parts of the middle game you need to work harder to find the biggest move - don't get sucked into tiny 2 point battles in the center when the edges are open!  Aside from that, just keep playing lots of games!  s: Please feel free to send me any questions about this review.
This seems the reverse of what I normally see (that is, first black move as Q16).  K- that is only a matter of etiquette, arising from face to face games, in which it is considered polite for black to play in the corner that is close to the white player's side of the board, and near his left hand, so that the white player (presumably right handed) only needs to reach the smallest distance to play his first stone. For online games, it doesn't really matter.
Took the usual black opening.
K- not generally a strong response. If you want to play in this direction, see variation for the standard sequence
This response countered what I'm normally told (regarding empty triangles). However, it was the only move I saw because of Q15 that would block B from advancing into the corner. Was this move necessarily bad?  K- the reason empty triangles are advised against is because in most situations, it is an inefficient use of your stones. In other words, even if the move isn't too bad, there is usually a better move somewhere else.  Your move does block black from entering the corner, however black would not actually gain very much from doing this, whereas you can make bigger gains by playing elsewhere. So I would suggest either of the other moves I have marked, depending on how comfortable you are with making moyos vs territory (A is a territorial move, B is moyo)
K- it is often a good idea to spread your stones out rather than making solid connections. In this case, I would recommend A instead. The clue that this is not the best move is that it creates an empty triangle.
K- this is a strong move by black, trapping your corner group into the corner. You are not in danger of having your group killed, but having it trapped into the corner means that later in the game you will not be able to use it to your advantage
K- there is a proverb, "don't play close to thickness", which means that if you play a stone (like this one) too close to the opponent's strong stones, you might regret it. In this case, black could start to attack your corner around A and use your defence to be able to build up a strong group, which would leave the stones you have played here stuck in between 2 strong black groups and looking vulnerable
K- this move is a mistake by black, because there are much better moves he can make elsewhere onthe board. As a guideline, you should avoid playing on the first or second line this early in the game
K- A would be better here
K- why not A?
K- good
K- also good!
K- not necessary yet (wait for black to force you to make this move). Instead you could take the initiative elsewhere, attacking black's corners along the bottom for example
Was a hane appropriate at this move?  K- it gives back the cut at A, which is bad for you, so see variation for an alternative here
This seems like either the result of a bad hane or overly aggressive play by black, but I'm not sure which.  K- most directly, the hane was the cause, but black is also playing aggressively in general
K- black is trapping you into the corner again - actually you could not break out through this gap, but that is what black is doing with this move.  So, it is a wasted move by black therefore a mistake - you can play elsewhere to take the initiative
K- a very small move, black can even ignore this and make a bigger move elsewhere
Was there any way to prevent this incursion (which cut significantly from my territory in the corner)?  K- yes, if you had played your previous move at A, this would no longer be available for black.  This large knight's jump, at this position on the edge of the board, is called a monkey jump, and it can be very nasty to defend against, so it is worth looking out for and defending against *before* it happens (by playing at A).
K- mistake by black, he could have played at A and made even more trouble for you
K- a sacrifice is often a good way to defend against a monkey jump, but in this case it doesn't work, so see variation for what is probably the best option you have - although it is painful!
K- black let you off here, he could continue to take away your territory by playing at A - it could get very nasty, see variation
K- not needed
K- not needed
K- good! you are taking the initiative now (tip: usually easier to do this invasion on the 3rd line, at A)
K- there is another proverb - when you attack your opponent, you make him stronger. A better strategy for you here would be to build up some strength by pushing in the other direction (for example at A) before fighting here
K- you could cause more trouble for black by playing at A here
K- playing at A is better shape
K- empty triangle! consider A instead
K- a key move, giving black a good chance of a huge territory on the right side - he could not have done this if you had played the move I've marked with a triangle at A instead. An example of why empty triangles are bad!
K- not needed
Did black allow me this area?  K- yes, black played a strategy of fencing you in, not trying to kill you, just giving you a small territory with a strong wall around so that you could not break out
K- you have a big problem now, because black has got a big advantage with his walls all over the board. In fact, it is probably worth resigning at this point - however, there is no harm in fighing on for the practice!  This is a good place to start.
K- this is too weak
K- empty triangle again. A is a vital point in this shape, you could play there instead (there is no guarantee here that you will live, so look for points that build eyes)
K- mistake by black, he should play at A
Was there any way to get a better result in the corner?  K- actually, you got away with it ok here, it looked like your group was dead until you got this capture.  The thing to remember when you invade a corner is this : you need to be able to threaten to break out, otherwise your opponent can just concentrate on killing your invaders. In this game, black had such strong walls that you could not really make this a credible threat, which is why you had a hard time in these 2 corners.
K- not needed
K- this is just taking away your own points! you already had 2 eyes here, no need to make a third
K- bold, and unlikely to live, but good practice! :-)
K- you should try to play at A before playing this stone
This move was a mistake, I suppose I should have played somewhere around here instead. I guess I don't play this because I feel the group not to be established enough. Christian: yes, Joseki is M17. Playing on the upper side is natural.
Christian: answering on the top is still natural.
Christian: You don't need to hurry with that invasion.
Christian: wrong direction.
Again, because I felt uneasy I played this in order to establish a more secure base. Could I haved tenuki? Christian: No,it is good style to build a base and make perfect shape at the same time. Because of w r11 another w move around s4 would be a burden for black.
What is the best here? What are the considerations to be dealt with? Christian: the upper right b group is still heavy. IMHO, you should play M17 or N16.
I checked this move was necessary other wise the group is dead Christian: this is the reason, why it is much better to play first there. Being forced to play at P18 is shameful.
Christian: a deep invasion might result in trouble. It is easier to play a high pincer or just extend at D14.
Christian: wrong direction.
What are the guidelines to follow and choose what move to play here? Christian: with san-ren-sei you should block at c16. Also, you would end up overconcentrated with H17, H15 if you block at d17.
I always tend to play this sequence. I suppose the other one was much better. Christian: yes :-)
I am not sure that I played very well here. I feell I wasn't  able to build a good wall to my advanrtage after the following sequence.
What should have been the corect answer there? Could I have played at F3? Christian: I am not sure. There is a cut at d5. Maybe it is best to defend at d5 directly.
Christian: make w heavy first.
Christian: Please, avoid empty triangels.
Result at this stage is very poor. I wasn't able to stop him to invade. Where did I play wrong.
Same questio here. Again he invaded me, where was I wrong?
Stupid mistake
dmg: Up to there, everything looks ok for me. It's a usual sequence in 9 stones games
dmg: This move is a little strange. It aims at influence toward center but leave the K16 alone. Preparing for a fight and, at the same time leaving white make things so the fight won't go on that side.  If the goal was to make territory, then the triangle stones are all too high.  For making territory, consider taking the corner in sente with A. For fight consider escaping your K16 stones either in C, B or D. The fight is favorable for black and black will certainly live with few points for white and you'll probably have C12 later.
dmg: As announced, white is closing down K16 and trying to capture large. Trying to get out at L15 is still a good option.
dmg: There you are forcing white to enclose K16 and reduce the aji of K16 without getting much territory. Triangles give an estimation of white can get with the sequence against what crosses that give what black can get. It's like giving 10 free points to white.
dmg: Big point but consider playing lower some time to secure some territory. R7 seems nice here.
dmg: Look at the sequence in variation. Also try to play on the 3rd line sometime. 2nd line: line of death :p 3rd line : line of territory 4th line : line of influence
dmg: What did you try to gain with this move ? consider pincer at M3 or H3. Attacking while stabilizing one of your groups.
dmg: good.
dmg: atari at D2 first. You can still play F2 later.
dmg: I think it safe to play E5 here. see variation.
dmg: Regarding the situation, this is small. R3 is bigger.
dmg: this is a total abuse you should punish. First O14 reinforce you and cuts white.
dmg: did you read it? No needs for trying to connect here since both your groups have eyes space and can goes towards the center.
dmg: bad shape. Except in the yose, don't push a keima except if either your are forced for getting life (this is not the case) or if you can cut (this is not the case).
dmg: and you got an horrible shape now. Without real eyes space
dmg: ok this is not a big issue. you are alive in the corner and you got some points in the lower right.
dmg: slow, slow, and slow. it worth only 4 points. See variation. A and B are still really big
dmg: You can probably kill either R6 or the O3 group.
dmg: nice sequence, now you are ready to attack O3 group if you do thing correctly.
dmg: this is an error, see variation.
dmg: I think, this is the part where white starts to win. Until now, mistakes were just compensed by the handicap. But here white is alive on the bottom right corner and can now attack your T10 groups.
dmg: N11 seems ok here.
dmg: let me see, slow, not protecting anything, not attacking anything and helping white. Consider playing around triangle stones to connect everything and to prepare the L6 cut.
dmg: starting here, the sequence is slow. D17 is enormous.
dmg: this is a gote 0point move.
dmg: 1point move.
dmg: and again
dmg: I think it's the wrong direction. you should be less passive.
dmg: this is the worst move I've seen in the whole game. it's playing inside your territory. If you want to secure your territory, try to play at B16.
dmg: Another big abuse by white.
dmg: NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO, punish white. (G11)
dmg: I think D9 is ok, see variation.
dmg: until here you get a nice sequence, even thought it's mainly due to white mistakes.
dmg: Bu I think you should connect at F11 here. and connect your groups.
dmg: white not H13 here?
dmg: 1point gote. N10 is probably bigger. Anyway, this ends the game mainly. Black has lost when he has failed his attack on the corner.
dmg: the last mistake is on that upper corner. S19 is mandatory here. Instead you played a 1point move.
dmg: seki.
Flameinice [3k]: hi youtou [2k]: hi
Too slow? Should I have pincered white instead?  Golf >> from my point of view, it is playable
Golf >> you should play at c6 (triangle)             prevent white from taking that point
Although I double approach a lot, I'm not quite sure how to continue.
A very loose pincer, or is it following the saying, "Don't play too close to your thickness?"  Golf >> white has problems on cutting at triangle
W20 and B21 are too slow, right?  -- W. 20 id bad move , should plat at r 3
I ran because I thought it'd be good to split white in two.  Golf >>>
I never know quite what to do in these situations. Any suggestions?
Golf >> good
Got careless and didn't think.
Golf >> black shouldn't make 2 weak groups
Was it better to cut here? Otherwise, as I see it, it only strengthens black.  Golf >> not good either
I'm always awkward with these connections.
This pretty much clinched the game.
Thanks for reviewing the game. I hope you enjoyed it!    Flameinice
Llywelyn: First mistake.  Black has just ceded too much in the corner.  Any of the marked points are more traditional.
Llywelyn: Black is pushing from behind while white picks up 4th line territory.  Meanwhile, Black's influence is held in check by A, and his ability to make territory is undermined by B.  White should be very happy with this result.
Llywelyn: Feels very constrained.  The rule of thumb is "number of stones in height + 1" and going out to C10 should be safe here.
Llywelyn:  W is basically in control of this game.  She is a little overextended... but not my much.
Llywelyn: Way too aggressive on B's part.  There isn't a lot of space in there, and W has fairly terrifying influence.  B also has a weakness around A that may come back to haunt him later.  I would--under less urgent circumstances--look at moves around B, C, or D.  E is also becoming really urgent, and is as deep as B should go.  B is a power move that puts a check on W working her way into the center.  It gives B some options both around L17 and around K3.  C protects the weak point and works well with Q4 for a fairly territorial approach.  D is probably too aggressive, but at this point B is a little behind and so an aggressive play may still be the right approach.
Llywelyn: White seems to have changed her mind.  K15 was a strategy aiming at center influence, O17 seems to be aimed at killing.
Llywelyn: I don't believe this is necessary.  It seems dead even without a move by W.
Llywelyn: waste of ko threats.  As a general rule Black would prefer to save moves that might save the group until there is a ko.
Llywelyn: Desperate.
Llywelyn: This feels bad for black.   Black wants support at around A for R5 to be a valid option.  The important thing to remember is that a contact play like R5 makes White stronger.  When Black already has an attacking stone in place around Q10 this can be acceptable, but is generally not the best option without a stone there.  The moves that immediately come to mind for me are A, B, and C.  There are probably other moves, but these are fairly regular and are good first moves to evaluate.  A is a powerful move that restricts W's local options.   The two most likely would be diving into the corner or jumping up to P6.    B emphasizes the southern side  at the cost of the east.  I might play this way i fit were peaceful and I were ahead and didn't have the aji to worry about at R15.  Since that isn't the case here, we'll discard it.  C is a looser version of A and shows more of a concern for R15.   It also works well against K3.
Llywelyn: W can be satisfied with the result, though the aji at R2 is disconcerting.
Llywelyn: Entirely too conservative.  Something around H3 is begging to be played and can affect the rest of the game.
Llywelyn: Southern side is huge.
Llywelyn: good.
Llywelyn: Weird play on W's part... D3 would have been firmer.
Llywelyn: Small.
Llywelyn: IW is starting to feel behind due to overly conservative play (D2, S10, etc), and so she eschews the more conservative plays (marked) with something that feels little more reckless.  Black at this point needs to figure out how to address K5 more directly and profit from it.  Since killing it seems unlikely, the better question is "how to chase it for profit."  One option would be to solidify Black's south side, another would be to try and grow out more into the center.  As an exercise, sit down and think about how that would flow if your goal isn't to kill, but to gain profit.  Remember, if you attack all out and fail you will be much worse off.  It's like following a broken ladder.
Llywelyn: The other direction seems more likely to save W.  She should play lightly.
Llywelyn: This feels overly aggressive.  It is unlikely that B will be able to kill W.
Llywelyn: Overly optimistic: B doesn't have an escape route or many liberties to play with.
Llywelyn: B should use the local ko threats at around S3 first.
Llywelyn: The endgame for both sides needs some work.
Llywelyn: Weird, R19 is much bigger.
Llywelyn: -1 point gote.  Not counting exactly, but going off of some quick estimates I would play them in the order A, B, D, and then whichever out of C and F that black doesn't take.
Llywelyn: Good.  This is the largest move on the board.
Llywelyn: -1 point gote.
robred40 [4k]: hi peterchris [5k]: hi hf
Here, you move E17. Its too defensive.
This is good joseki move but also..
Now these stones are seperated.
İts very early 3-3 move. Right side is still open.
Game lost move! You can easily defend there. But your right area is open for atacks. For this..
peterchris [5k]: close game peterchris [5k]: black has four corners
pmurphy [10k]: have fun
oswaldo [12k]: buenas noches
As this is a 2 stone game, black has stones on both facing corners.  So I think white can choose either option A or B and be fine.  It's a  matter of taste.  I go into detail here because I find Q4 a very interesting move.  The moves A and B may not seem obvious from an opening position as it is.  However, the white move of R8 (marked) is too loose and has little impact.
This white extension seems a bit too far.
Black has the corner, white should get some balance and create some power.
Pushing here is almost always bad, and I'd say it is again bad here.
This is a mistake for black.  White needs to make him pay.  The variation shows a powerful way to play.  The lesson here is to see this black stone as a way to create power for white at the cost of only a handful of points, maybe 4 or 5.
This is not good.
Always block on the side that will get you the most points.
I thought I would have been able to kill this, do you see a way to?  review:
White is building a pretty big framework on the right.  Approaching the black stone may not be so exciting because  there is a kind of symmetry there.
I'd approach from the other side.  There is more profit there, there is nothing on the bottom for white.
Now that I'm looking at it, it seems as though I totally abandoned the corners.  review: Yes, I agree.  But black still has a weak group that's available for attack.
The interesting thing in this game for white is the black group at the top.  Black wants white to play D12 here.  Therefore, white must not play D12.
And black's top group can breath a sigh of relief.
Here's the pattern we talked about, and in this case, black plays it too early.
This is an odd move.
Black gets out and the game is over.
Again, this stone needs to be attacked.
oswaldo [12k]: Se me fué el ratón!!1 oswaldo [12k]: disculpa pmurphy [10k]: yo no habla espagnol oswaldo [12k]: Ok
See the variation for a way to cut.  But with Q10 black group, white has no way of making points at this stage.
From this point on, it is the yose.  My comments from here on out are sparse because the review focused on the opening moves.
Because black has lots of territory and very few weaknesses, black has his way with white.  White has almost no interesting yose moves, and certainly none as big as black.
Let's see if w can do something to that black group which is sitll weak in the upper side.
Oh, black is under attack all of a sudden.
White should connect here.
pmurphy [10k]: ?
Bad move
White makes an even worse move.
This move does to white what c12 should have done to you, create two weak groups.
You shouldn't peep at two stones that are at the 3rd and 5th line.
Bad, you are pushing from behind.
You don't shoulder hit a weak stone
Too slow
I think that was too passive for w. I would make a base for my stones at C6  This is a horrible move, it doesn't do anything for white, it doesn't even protect the cut; All it does is help you create territory, it probably was better to play c6 for white.
Wow, it's just 1 weak group after another is it?
Strengthening c9 with a shoulder hit, and now strengthening h17 with a direct cap? Very, very bad.
Would it have been better to extend out at H15?
You're trying to save about 5 points
White links up his two weak groups to form central influence, that is a double-whammy. By now, you have already used up your handicap.
We get greedier and greedier don't we? This only strengthens white's top influence.
It's bad to peep at what could be a possible cut. By playing this move, all aji in that area has been erased.
I don't see what you're trying to accomplish with this move, the top is clearly an open skirt, and your position is too thin, it's easily going to be destroyed.
Y
You don't start a fight with weak groups.
I thought it would be a waste to save that lone starpoint stone, but I do think that I should have thought about the corner first.  The corner is huge, you should have given the priority to the corner, the l15 stones are easily sacrificeable.
This move shows why E9 should have been played eariler.
You are pretty much trying to build influence towards a part with white stones on it, and you help your opponent build influence towards the most open side. Don't play josekis blindly!
Strengthens white group.
Although not the optimal play for white, he has certainly took too much of the bottom. Notice though how his left side only has one eye.
Painful
Odd sequence
artboy598 [9k]: your not much of a talker I see
I think now that I should have reduced at around m4.  I think my move was passive.  Be that as it may, capturing those four white stones was gigantic, you secure two weak groups.
sanchez [7k]: k dices artboy598 [9k]: huh?  Spanish for "What did you say?"  Obviously, he's not much of a talker because he's Spanish =)  Anyhow, odd move, it accomplishes nothing, it takes little territory and doesn't really strengthen your groups or weaken any of whites.
Too tight, white should play about one line higher
L4 is still very large, P6 doesn't make any sense because there's no moyo on the left.
Good!
Should I have defended at m11  It's an endgame move.
A blunder by me :(   His blunder, P6 is worth more.
Should have just played at S9
Pointless
I had not no
This certainly kills him.
As you probably know, you shouldn't have saved that stone.
Had he not been so greedy and took the two stones, your A6 stones would have been gone.
Well, since it's purely endgame moves from now on, and that's pretty much a very dry boring subject (Which have several dry boring books on endgame theory), I'll have to stop here. Just remember to count, endgame is all about counting, sente, and gote.
venkman [?]: hi, have fun sushou: hi
Donal: Up to here, looks pretty good.
Donal: For all I know, a pro might play white 6 here, but I wouldn't want to. It's really hard to get a good result. Black will naturally pinch on the left side, putting White under a lot of pressure and working perfectly with Black's star point at the upper left.  The first move that springs to mind is to play white 6 at A, making B and C miai. Or I might simply play at D, threatening E next.  When I see White 6, my impression is that White is jealous of Black's framework, and begrudges him any of it. It is important to remember that White get's komi, and that has to make up for Black's first move advantage. You can't nullify Black's advantage by brute force.  Or if you are a stone stronger than Black and there is no komi, just relax and wait for him to make a mistake.
After Black pinches, White could of course play something ordinary by jumping at A and then attaching at C for example. But this doesn't seem all that good.
I looked it up afterwards, and this one doesn't exist - should be A or B apparently.  Donal: "Looking up" such a move is meaningless unless the whole board is the same. This kind of move goes beyond joseki to an analysis of the entire position.  Your idea here is presumably to give up white 6 in return for getting a free move at 8, and then get a powerful pincer against 5. For that purpose white 8 is too far away from black 5. And yet it is too far from white 6 to give you much play in the corner.  If I could pick two consecutive plays on the lower side, they would be at C and D. Only with a powerful attack against black 5 can you make up for the huge loss you incurred with sacrificing white 6.
Because white 10 is so far away, Black is able to attach at A. He could not have done this if White had played at B instead of 10 (see diagram).
In the game, Black gets a comfortable position. A and B are miai. White didn't get enough of an attack to justify his sacrifice of white 6.
Black 17 is an overplay, leaving bad aji in the corner. He should have played at A instead. White can now play A, and if B, C protects White's group in sente (see diagram).
Blocking at black 25 was not that good. White gets a nice corner territory in sente, and if White plays carefully he can erase Black's outside thickness. See the diagram for another option.
However, White 36 is too heavy. White quickly gets into trouble. Perhaps a move at A would be better.
Black has a perfect attack, and it's difficult to find a good move. White A looks like it has possibilities.
Normally, you would expect Black to block at A, but that just propels White to escape at B. Black 45 is an interesting idea.
I decided to cut off the marked stone in order to work towards connecting the two groups.  Should I capture the third-line stone instead?  Donal: Yes, that would be better. Since Black has invested an extra stone at 45 before invading, the loss of one white stone is not that big. You could have easily settled your lower-side group.  Also, since Black has good attacking chances against White's two groups, playing Black 49 at A would be better. He can attack the whole group rather than cutting off just part of it.
White is in deep trouble with two weak groups.
Black 59 at 60 would have been even better. Also, 61 at A gives a better attack. Even so, this ko is a big problem for White.
I figured that the central thickness was worth more than the ko threat, but a few moves later I wasn't so certain anymore.
White 70 is no good, because if Black blocks at A, White is dead. To live in the corner, crawl once more at A. But there might be a better way to play here. (See diagram.)
I felt I had no good points to play after this move.  Donal: Black 73 is an excellent point, and White needs another play to live in the lower left corner. I suggest white A, black B, white C, black D, White E.
Black missed the killing blow, and let White live.  In this game, White's problems started with white 6. He played a difficult move, and didn't find the best follow-up. Later when Black invaded at 47 he chose a variation that left him without eyes and subject to attack. Finally, with white 70 he made a reading mistake that should have lost him the game on the spot, but his opponent didn't realize it.  Each of these mistakes was probably worth 15 points. So work to avoid them and you will be three stones stronger.  White 6 and the following moves were the main thing, so work on studying the opening.  (end of Donal's comments)
I didn't want to let him live too easily, but it seems the marked stones will turn into two weak groups.
This would appear to be the losing move.
venkman [?]: thanks
OK here I really wanted to play O16 but decided to relax in this game and played S14 but then he ended up getting the top sideand it seemd like he was ahead the whole game
buckyyowza:  This is best choice here.  Once more stone at Q9 or Q10 makes the right side very large for black.  O16 leaves too much settled after the joseki for my taste, and in this position things are very open and flexible, which makes white's upper side more vulnerable, but only after a successful invasion on the left or the center.
buckyyowza: Too slack, black is now behind.  After K16, it is urgent to invade the upper left in sente. See var for the right timing for Q10.  I don't know a follow up to S14 so I did this. Is there a follow up to S14?
Here I felt like he had a huge moyo and I had next to nothing.  So I played C10 but that just seemed to help him.  Is there a better way to play?
buckyyowza: bad choice.  White can play E8 now, kill one of these groups, then chase the other across the board gobbling up moyo.  E9 is best to reduce now, E10 even better to extend without aji keshi - causing white to build a wall.  Even without D6, F3 is still an invasion point as long as white isn't very developed off of C8.  I chose to try and reduse at this point, but I was at a loss as to where I should play to do that.  Could I have played else where?
I think he could have done a lot better here, but I don't know how.
buckyyowza: This is about as good as black can hope after playing D6.
buckyyowza: I would advise against this line of play.  Black is helping white to build thickness and seal off the lower side, which is much bigger than the center. I prefer F4 or H4 is this situation.
buckyyowza: This needs to be deeper.  From G3, you can connect underneath if the upper path fails. See var.
buckyyowza: This area is too difficult at this point.  Better for black to use this new thickness to invade the upper side.  Think about F16 or M16 now.  Move 29 - 40 I think was really bad for me.but I thought that I could reduse him some and tryed.  iI there a was to reduse him here?
buckyyowza: oops :)  Try J4
buckyyowza: K2 connects out. See var.
buckyyowza: White fails to punish K2 :)
Trying to reduse again
buckyyowza: This is much better aji for black.  This move was OK.  I don't know if I needed to take that stone. I just thought that it looked a lot better for black.  Did I need to take it?
buckyyowza:  When invading like this, lean toward the corner - so play F17 instead.  It is typically easier to live in the corner than on the side if you get disconnected.
buckyyowza: not to repeat comments, but lean toward the corner ;)  Play F17 instead, see var.
buckyyowza: yes, O15 kills the black stones.  Can he play O15 and hope to take my stones?
Random....
buckyyowza: Take the ko in sente.  It is usually best to finish what you start, even if you change your mind, at least as long as the sente lasts.  This is a solid move, but is gote.  Taking the ko lets you put this sort of play off while keeping sente.
buckyyowza: this is OK, no worries. see var on 111  bad, bad, bad
here he could have just taken them and saved his stones at N4 right?  buckyyowza: correct.
buckyyowza: note the empty triangle shape.  even as part of a bigger group, this shape is still ineffective.  black has presence on both sides of the situation, try P6 instead.
buckyyowza: black needs S10 now to prevent a full invasion.  Instead he could have played at R8 and would have got more right?  But is that thwe best move for me?
buckyyowza: good move :) white apparently never saw this opportunity.    I got worried and protected
He has more kos then I do so I played one up  buckyyowza: ko or not, T16 is disaster ;-)  see var.
Was that the best he could do?  buckyyowza: not much. black is pretty solid here because of the eye + several liberties at j9.  This is probably white's best move on the board because it is sente and doesn't give up the opportunity for more points.
amenity [1k]: hi
rlkeaton3 [1k]: have fun
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I looked up the joseki and saw that this is incorrect, I know that the move is at H4. rlkeaton3 [1k]: But after looking at the joseki, I am still satisfied because white played a mistake at D6, it should be at D7  Az: White made a mistake, but it's really a minor joseki mistake. The only problem with his move was that it was a little slow. Trying to do something really agressive and crazy just because white was a little too solid is a bad idea. Black should stick to the joseki at H4, that would be waaaay bette than game.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I would like some alternatives for this line.  I thought about just playing F3 to secure myself but I didnt want to give white any time. rlkeaton3 [1k]: By line I mean 14-22  Az: G4 is the mistake which lead to this result, pushing from behind like that is almost never good. B 'a' is the biggest move and will remain the biggest move while both sides ignore it for something else. Black needs to get all of his stones working together, which is what 'a' does. It is the difference between thickness and a weak group.
Az: Can also be the solid connection, I would prefere to play that way personally but both may be ok.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I think this was the correct choice of joseki for me, C15 seems like a mistake for white.  Az: White choose the worst move he could find in a joseki book for the situation. B is a little close however, I'd still like to have played the solid connection so B not so close.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: This may have been a mistake, but I wanted to play more securely this game, I have a problem of letting my groups get too strong of an attack against them.  Az: Seems reasonable ot me, tenuki is not an option.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: At this point I was satisfied with the situation, although I probably should not tenuki, maybe F3 still  Az: 'a' only move, this is the wrong direction of play, black must not let his "wall" get seperated from the Q4 stone. Then a move like this would be ok followup
rlkeaton3 [1k]: this was a misclick which white did not take advantage of, I thought white would win the game here.  Az: Passing would have the advantage of not making bad shape. It is harder to find a move that feels good for B locally than it was before O17
rlkeaton3 [1k]: What do you think of this move?  Az: Necessary, allowing W to play around here would be unbearable.
Az: B 'a' seems like the right direction of play. If W 'b' then B 'c' would be reasonable. Living in the corner is too small and doesn't affect the rest of the board.
Az: B can response with a move around 'a', whites eyespace starts to look bad and now the cut has some teeth to it. White cannot play 'b' and seperate the B stones (B just plays 'c'). Answering as in game is too submissive.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: As I was saying earlier, I allow myself to be attacked too strongly. this does not look good for black, although I have alive rlkeaton3 [1k]: I am alive*
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I wonder about this move, it has become a habit of mine, But, R12 may be better.  Could you show me some variations instead of B61.  Az: This is alright, so is R12. W is thick in the center, so a move side / center oriented move like R12 might not be the best choice here.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: same move =) rlkeaton3 [1k]: I think it is a little more necessary here though  Az: This is fine. I don't want to say that enclosing is always right, but it's not often 'wrong', if that makes sense.
Az: 'a' is the biggest point on the board, 'b' would be second. This is too conservative, unlike W's extension you're not extending from a weak group.
Az: Give me a break, this is like 5 points in gote.
Az: 'a' still, it is big both because a move around there might turn into reverse sente for white, and beccause it limits whites ability to do anything in the center if the group on the left isn't fully alive. This move is too agressive and just tries to make white fix aji he already wanted to fix.
Az: White is very blunt in the next few moves, giving black back a decent position. W 'a' or something like that would be better than pushing from behind like he did. This turned an iffy move for B into a good move.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: Now I feel that I have won the game  Az: Looks good for B
Az: Better to just extend, this is encouraging W to play moves he wants to play.
Az: Good technique
rlkeaton3 [1k]: How should I respond to this move?  Az: The response in game is better than the other atari, this is enough for black. It is reasonable to expect B may have to give up a couple points to block white off, since he only had a couple loose stones
Az: Atari first, then 'b'
rlkeaton3 [1k]: In review this looks like I definetly should have played N11 first.  Az: Yes, see var
rlkeaton3 [1k]: This is a mistake I think, can you see a good move for reducing white here?  Az: 'a'? Oh wait, wrong part of the board. still the best move since it's sente. You don't have to worry about W terroritory here too much. B 'b' isn't especially inspired, but it ought to be enough to keep white from getting a huge profit here and give you sente move on
rlkeaton3 [1k]: No comments needed after this point. rlkeaton3 [1k]: Thank you for your time.  Az: Q8 was costly and black didn't get some of the sente moves he deserved elsewhere on the board, so at this point I could the game as close or perhaps tilting slightly white. B got lucky capturing the stones when white screwed up.
Peter: Mogo has strange moves, but I have no idea how to handle them. At the end all the moves of Mogo are working nice together.
Peter: I just go to another corner
Peter: choose the corner Mogo is surrounding. Marcin: Right!
Peter: or at the X Marcin: Seems too slow - see variations
Marcin: Seems too passive - much slower then white - see variation
Marcin: Corner still seems bigger - common opening rule is: Corners, then expansion along sides, then rest of the board.
Peter: Did not play at X, because of white would play at A, and then i got two running groups. Is this correct or just to territorial? Marcin: H17 seems better if you are aiming in attacking white stones in central top, which are not stable yet.
Peter: Later in the game I thought this was not correct. Better at A? Marcin: Nice shape, a would be too low, but there is no necesity to play defensive moves at all - corner is quite safe, and r11 can defend q14 or r8, so it's time to play something big (maybe bottom right corner?)
Marcin: the same - if you want to win, you cannot follow your opponent if it isn't necessary :)
Marcin: M17 stone gives nice continuation with l16, but maybe it was to early - bottom right corner still is bigger, other moves are sente because they are aiming at destroying white center....
Peter: Here maybe A or B? I just tell you my doubts.. Marcin: seems too small
Peter: I was just walking to get at this point to cut and invade at both sides, but further on it does not work out very well, except that I got into whites area.
Peter: here I had much trouble how to handle this white invasion.
Marcin: O17 seems better - see variation
Peter: Now I seemed to lose the area marked X.
Peter: What to do?
Peter: Is trying to save these stones worth it? Marcin: seems good
Peter: I took the stones so maybe later I could connect the X marked stones underneath. Marcin: There is no need to connect two living groups
Peter: Better at A or B? Marcin: I would prefer B
Peter: Strange move of Mogo.
Peter: Strange again, i'll expected A, but its still a program ;-) Marcin: A is dame
NM: Good
NM: In this sort of open position I prefer C13 or D14.
NM: This is the right area to play in.
P: looking back this was not the best choice I should have played at Q14 and then R10. This seems to be a better layout for my stones.  NM: Actually, I prefer this as leaving less room between R9 and Q4; but I don't think the difference is huge.
NM: This is OK. Given the empty space round J3, I would be inclined to play P4, because it turns the area round R9 into something very close to territory.
NM: this feels like an overplay. What about simply answering R3, and then pushing through and cutting?
P: I do not like my shape, it seems overconcentrated in the bottom.  NM: Well, yes - but once you'd played Q6 this was pretty well inevitable. At this point I think I would prefer Q7 to P6, but again a question of taste.
P: Looking back this move may been too slow, but invading the top did seem like good timing.  NM: A bit slow - it does give you one more line, about 6 points - but playing elsewhere should be worth more.
P: Black seems to be doing much better than white, I can not get the initiative.  The top will be harder to invade now.  NM: You can still invade in all sorts of places (H17, M17, K17, J16 ...).   In terms of territory, I think B is ahead, but only very slightly:  B about 24 points in TL, 5 in TR, 12 in BR, 11 in BL: 52, with excellent prospects on the top (e.g. F15 gains some 20 points)  W 16 on R, 10 at TR, 10 at B, 6.5 komi: 41.5, with good prospects on the L and sente.
NM: Big, but F15 is bigger. I would either invade or reduce the top here. My move of choice would be H17.
NM: Too close; W can reply C9, and the result will push W towards B's big area. C(9, or even C8, would be better. But I think F15 better still.
NM: This is what I would have wanted to do, but I think I would have exploited the overextension of C11 first, by an exchange something like W C9, B E11, W13 first. Otherwise you give B the chance to chase out your H17 stone and turn C11 into a good move.  But that is very much a matter of taste.
NM: There are many possibilities, including K18, J16, H15. This is likely to leave W a bit heavy, but it's certainly playable.
P: this group could have been very heavy, but again white seems cramped in black's area.  NM: Yes, W is heavy and cramped - tends to happen after invasions. As long as the B F17 group is not alive, W shouldn't worry.  Here I would have played the other hane K15 or nikken tobi J14 - but this achieves the objective.
NM: ... which is what I was afraid of.
NM: Here I would definitely prefer J13, as getting more breathing room.
I struggled to find the best move here. Not severe?  NM: Come on! You can't try to be severe when you're being chased and there are no weak enemy groups around. But I don't like this move - it seems to me neither to extend the R moyo nor to link to the H17 group. On the other hand if B cuts one link it'll reinforce the other, so it's possible.  I thinkI would play L11 and then K18.
NM: You are trying to gain support for the H17 group, but you risk making it easier for B to invade your only big moyo. This move is playable,
NM: ... but I think this is wrong. The hane is an attacking move, and you're not attacking anything. If you really want to attack, play D12o or E12. Otherwise, defend at G11 and then play somewhere round N9.
NM: B should play M10 or N11.
NM: Good.
P: Looking back maybe J9 is better to separate black, my 2 white stones (L9 and L10) could have probably managed.  NM: Yes, I would have pushed first, and then come back to H10 which is good shape.. The difference in the shape is conisderable. Remember if you play K18 you're virtually alive anyway
P: N10 to separate seems much better now looking back!  NM: Yes, I was going to ask why you hadn't.
NM: Terrible! You're pushing him into your moyo. Should be P10.
P: painful...
NM: Lots of holes in W's shape here.
P: hoorible white shape... this fight in the middle was bad for white.  NM: Yes, W is behind. But if you come out with sente the game is still worth playing - something like G8 and H6, or even Q9 to hold your territory.
NM: No, far too small. As I wrote before, G8 and H6; or else Q9.
NM: Similarly, B should not reply. Playing G3, J5, or L8 would win B the game comfortably.
NM: Again yose - there's more to play for!
NM: Finally! But not enough, I fear.
NM: Too defensive. I would have played F5.
NM: Too small. I would play G8 followed by G6. At that point, we would have:  B TR 18, BR 11, TL 4, BL 26: 59 with good prospects on the L and sente.  W TC 9, TL 8, B 16, R perhaps 20 + komi: 48.5 with excellent prospects at the bottom.  So B still ahead but definitely worth playing.
P: White at C18 would have been better. to give enough space to my group.
NM: Good! To have any chance now W has to push up with F4. If B can turn the E7 area into territory he will be way ahead.
NM: I would have played L8 first, but this is OK.
NM: Overplay. And unnecessary: Simply H5 is better.
NM: good. This puts W back into the game.
NM: W should cut on the other side at K4. It gets a bit frightening, but W can resist B's L8. And K4 also reinforces the link to H6.
NM: No, W can't afford this move, must play something like G5, even at the cost of allowing B to push through at the bottom. Imagine W G5, B F5, W F6, B BE6, W F7, B E8, W Q9, and we would have:  B TR 18, BR 11, TL 4, BL 30: 63 and sente.  W R 25, BC 21, BL 9, TL 10+ komi: 71.5 So quite close.
NM: Here I would play K3 (sente), followed by Q9. But B is clearly ahead.
P: white is dead, I neglected this group too long.  NM: I don't think so, but even with W alive here he should lose the game. B can come out with sente, reduce W somewhat on the R in sente, and then turn the N15 area into territory.. See the variation - which I don't guarantee is perfect but gives an idea.
spider8 [7k]: nice game
Movag [7k]: yeah
Hi, thanks for reviewing my game. (I was black.)  Hi ... hope I can make a contribution although I rarely play the opening you did. I checked my opening tutor on Many Faces and I couldn't find your opening .. so it looks like it is very original!  I've looked through the game and I think that what will most help black at the moment is for you to only attach to your opponents stone when you need to .. either to live or for you to make him heavy so you can attack him. You seem to often attach and not realise that this helps your oponent
This is an unusual place to play. It is unnecessarily passive. Once white plays d10 or there abouts I dont see any advantage for black ...
This is joseki but r3 is not .. it is too loose
This move was just sloppy reading.   Yea if expoited will be problematice for black
I think it was a wise decision to give up r3
Whites move is not urgent and seems a bit slow to me
I would play r14 but I don't think it is necessarily better ... it seems like a good place to play for me
q11 stops white moving in ... but it would be foolish for white to move in now as there are so many black stones
e17 is not good... as a general rule only attach to an oponents stone if you want to make your opponent heavy so you can attacke him or attache if you are fighting for life. Here neither is the case
I like d14 gives you the corner and makes l16 a possibility
I think the same problem here.. by playing d6 you help your opponent. He can now strengthen himself and get good shape
Same problem of attaching ... look at my variation as a possible way it could go
I think by this point, with pretty large bases on 3 sides, white had pretty much won already, so I'm mostly interested in advice on how not to let that happen!  Well I'm not sure I agree ... I'll mark on the board where white is vulnerable. At all of these places black can make significant inroads. I think black does the right thing by attaching here .. it doesn't unecessariky help white
Again don't attach .. see variation
Black does well here but f16 is too slow ... f17 is not a problem and looking at the board  The x's mark where it is better for black to play
P 15 is mistake as white doesn't need to reply
n 13 is good you have to play here
I think this abortive attempt at cutting also did me more harm than good. Can white be cut here? perhaps with m11? Would better play be just to let white connect and try for some territory in the centre?
Shaydwyrm:  No reason not to play G3 here.  It adds eyeshape to your group and narrows the gap between your wall and Q4 slightly more.
Is this move correct?  Shaydwyrm:  This is absolutely the correct move.  Because this is such a perfect move, L3 is a mistake (it should be at M3 or N3, if he must play a move in this area).
This one better at k6 and try to wall in white?  Shaydwyrm:  Yes, I think K6 is a better approach.  Even if white gets to play near the edge first, it still won't be enough to ensure life, and it will definitely be gote.  At that point you can play O14 or O15 and your moyo on the right looks extremely imposing.
Shaydwyrm:  I don't think there's a good reason to play this peep, especially since it looks like it might be more useful from the other side.
Shaydwyrm:  Note that the J5 peep looks like it could be useful now.
Is this the right direction?  Shaydwyrm:  I think it's not, mainly because you are thick on the bottom right now, not on the top.  You should attack from your weak side, so that those stones get stronger in the process.  See the variation.
Shaydwyrm:  Again, this may not be the ideal move for attacking.  However, black is very far ahead on territory right now, so moves like this should be enough to win.  Since you have already leaned on the top, hitting on top of these stones also looks reasonable.
Shaydwyrm:  This is a wasted move if it's not sente.  The area in the middle is too wide to enclose like this, with G8 and the top still open.  This might be a good time to invade the upper side, if you are inclined to do that, but first I would count the score.    You have almost 50 points in the lower right that are secure, and maybe 20 points on the left side, although you will need to spend another move there.  Meanwhile, white has 14 points in the lower left, maybe 10 on the right side, and another 10 secured on the top, plus whatever comes out of the top left (not secure territory yet.  In other words, at this point, you are way, way ahead, to the tune of 30+ points.  Thus, you can afford to play conservatively and take solid territory.  E14, or maybe bB16 wC17 bE14, is a good way to start, eliminating some bad aji in your position.  Alternately, Q18 also looks good - takes another 10 points in the corner, and with the invasion in the middle of the top still open, is probably sente against white's group on top.    Note that the profit from your great thickness in the lower left came out in the lower right, and in the moyo you made on the left side.
Shaydwyrm:  This move is a bit loose.  White is pretty stuck here, there's no reason to leave any holes for him to play with.  P5 is enough.
I should have played this one elsewhere. C17 maybe?  Shaydwyrm:  For sure, but C17 is better at B16 (where you ended up playing in a few moves).  C17 does too much damage to your C14 stone.
Shaydwyrm:  This move seems nice at first glance.  It threatens the bottom side group and also looks at enclosing a lot of middle territory with a follow-up at E14, or maybe at J15 first.  However, because L1 and G2 are available for white's bottom side group, you're unlikely to be able to kill it, so unfortunately it doesn't look like this is sente.  Too bad that sequence in the bottom right left that aji behind...
Shaydwyrm:  This move kinda demands a response, as it makes your left side look thin.  It should really be almost a thank-you move, if you respond at D13 or so - it takes away a big potential weakness, and doesn't make much territory for white.
This was also wrong I think, only some points in gote.  Shaydwyrm:  Right.
B11 instead of this one?  Shaydwyrm:  Yes, it looks like the consequence of ignoring F13 is having to fall back to B11 here.  As an alternative to B11, trying E14 is also worth a look - if white connects at F14, you can come back and play B8; if not, you cut off F13 and potentially make a big chunk of center territory.
Shaydwyrm:  F13 makes this invasion much more severe.  It's a tough position, and it's hard for me to say if there's anything more you could have done.  It looks like there are some possibilities starting with C11 here.
Shaydwyrm:  Saving that stone looks fairly profitable as well.
This one lost white the game.
Shaydwyrm:  Looks like you can do a lot more damage here - see the variations.
T14 better I think.
I should not have ignored B9
Should have been at H15 I think
I played this to save G16. T18 would have been better.
This did nothing but destroyed ko treat.
artboy598 [9k]: onegaishimasu  White 2 is facing the wrong direction. It gives black a nice approaching move at E17, the direction black wants to develop.
DTP101 [9k]: yes tha 13 letter word
DTP101 [9k]: lol artboy598 [9k]: it means please ,as in please a good match
H17 seems like an overplay, creating a weak group for black to attack.
artboy598 [9k]: play me 4real too, no tricky stuff
Up until here, white is still not settled.
DTP101 [9k]: ok ill try  Kicking the R14 stone here is not the best move.
White tenukis a lot and seems to like weak groups. This is not a good thing. Having many weak groups often result in the opponent attacking multiple groups at once, and one of them might die.
Artboy= what should i have done here?
White should take care of the m3 group before playing on the right side.
This is solid, but perhaps, a pincer is better.
You can tenuki. If you want to be safe, maybe playing S5 is more efficient.
White should take care of the two weak groups.
This is the wrong direction. It extends out from white's already solid group while there are two white weak groups to consider. Naturally black's weak group moves up, which threatens white's group on the right.
DTP101 [9k]: thank u
artboy598 [9k]: hey, u gave me one
DTP101 [9k]: yea
DTP101 [9k]: b right back artboy598 [9k]: ok
artboy598 [9k]: sorry
DTP101 [9k]: it koo
T8 helps black more than it helps white.
This is a big ko. White should fight the ko.
B19 not needed.
O19 is gote for white. White should play T16 instead.
artboy598 [9k]: =]
A6 not needed.
This seems like very passive play. Yes, in a normal game, this would be useful for black, but in a handicap game, a slightly different play style is prefered. Either use the handicap stones to always attack, forcing white to live small everywhere (can be very scary when playing someone so much stronger) or play solid, slightly slow moves that can't be made useless by clever play, being careful to parsel out the advantage throughout the game so you are still leading when it's over.  This fuseki leaves the 3-3 points open (white can at any point play C3 or R3 and gain), which can exploit later in the game. I've outlined some alternatives I feel might better suit the strength difference in the game tree.
R8 is a strong attack on your corner, putting all your stones there in jeopardy; here a solid move from the outside is very risky. R6 would be my choice, securing the corner and becomming solid in preparation for splitting white's surrounding stones,.
You practically have to cut here. Handicap stones are tremendous influence, and any attack which doesn't cost you a lot if it fails should be tried, and are likely to be successful.
Much too close, make sure your stones are connected. J3  or E2 here to cancel any chance of a white base.
This sequence is only really useful if you block white from the center. If A was your planned move, play it without J4, or even without H3
Small endgame gote move. Gains you nothing at this stage. If you're worried about corner life, play a shape move, like Q2 or R2, which won't in the process solidify your opponent.
Again you leave your corner group very vulnerable.
Seems like white made a mistake here.
This shape (square marked) should always be recognized as weak. The triangle marked cutting point is the achilles heel. A move like E11 then is quite counterproductive, as you can see that you are creating a weak spot for yourself at E10.
Imagine if this was the stone played first here, would you then answer F11 with E11? This move makes E11 even more useless, as you are no longer cutting white off from crawling further.
The more common move is to press once more.
D14 is the heavier group, and the one you should try to connect out with.
I'd favor connecting at E14. Solid and slow wins handicap games.
Cut at once here.
This is well played (from M17 to here). White gained very little here, and you became solid.
Much too cautious, while also leaving open the peep at G15.
This is tenuki for the situation at the left, which is much bigger.
The left hand side is VERY complicated; I would suggest that unless you've read it out to the end, that you try to play (just making sure you don't die in gote.) It's at least 30 points if you die, the clearly biggest play on the board. See variations in the game tree.
This is what wins the game. White kills you, and at the same time secures his last weak group. You might have a few points lead here in an even game, but in a handicap game, it's game over.
Not needed, white can't cut.
Both groups need defending, a hard choice. I would probably feel most secure playing on the right.
You're letting white connect in sente. Even if the cut don't work, it forces white to add a move here.
Risky. I would feel much more secure with the stone at J18.
You can now play R2 and live.
You can play ko here, by moving at S2
Yes, it is a missclick. S2 kills.
Not needed, I guess white is just ensuring there's not a lot of ko threats around.
F9 is worth more, and just as sente.
This is nothing. If you wish to connect, G5 is the move.
Since white connects all his stones anyway, K15 is better.
A: Just a note: Black's usual followup at A seems to me to be a good choice here. White ends that likely sequence (at least in my estimation) with a wall that is bracketed by solid black positions.  Your move at B is, I think, a good pick too, so long as you remember that defending the H3 stone pushes White to go after the relatively weak corner stone.
A: My gut reaction was that C6 should be at A, simply based on the nicer shape. I did a quick database search that found no matches for C6 in this position and several for A, so that seems to be   The issue is that the surrounding move provokes fighting, and the shape made by C6/F6 is very cuttable and a liability in the coming fight.
A: Whenever you have this shape, your stone on the fourth line diagonally bumping a third line stone, it almost always induces a move like White D6. That move is such a great shape point for both players, I cannot think of a situation where one wouldn't play it.  Knowing that, in this case it induces a move that connects White's more strongly, so playing it to live with a small corner should be a last resort.   Also, cutting and fighting feels more consistant with your pick of H5.
A: I assume this is one of the White overplays of which you spoke? Indeed, this feels very dangerous since it will strengthen Black while White still has a cut threat around E5.
A: You didn't kill White in that sequence, but as White I'd certainly feel punished. You are strong enough to cut with impunity now, White has a small (and not yet definitively alive) side group, and you got a great wall.  Life is good.
A: And this is a great way to use the cut threat! Instead of just cutting, and letting white potentially sacrifice some stones, you invade. The weakness of white's group is your ace in the hole in case your invasion gets in trouble.
A: At first I thought that this move was worse than definitively cutting White with a move on the left side, but see the variations for some of the troubles White runs into trying to connect out.  When you create more than one weak group, you get saddled with all kinds of problems like this, and your tactical choices are severely reduced.
A: White invites more trouble by playing from the strong side.
A: I'm not sure I'd invade here, but after White blocks at Q17 and lets you connect it ends up fine.
A: Black loses a move here, and White takes advantage to live. Missing even half a step in a life or death fight can mean a huge swing in points.
A: White ignored Q15 earlier, which really hurt the shape of the triangled stones. Great way to take advantage and press down on them!
A: Again, great way to take advantage of White's ignoring a move.
A: What is the situation on the board right now? See the variation for a quick count.
White resigned here.
EtienneG [12k]: Hedllo EtienneG [12k]: have a good game too
Moving into the corner.
There are three areas of the board that you can play in. 1 is definitely the smallest. The gap between A and B is very safe, and extending into the area around one seems very small at this point in the game.  2 is a very nice area indeed, but you must first look at area 3. White already has a wall, so now you need to make it useless. If you play too close to the wall, you will be pincered, and have a hard fight. Play too far away, and white will get a nice extension.
The idea of this play was to prevent white from building up a wall and containing my group to a very small space. I think perhaps there was a better way to achieve these goals, or just somewhere better to play at this point.  ****  This is a little over concentrated I think. Instead of preventing a wall, I would make the wall that white already has turn into a useless wall.
Now, white has the ideal extension
Contain white on the side and grab as much corner as I can.  ***** This is the exact position that I would have wanted to avoid. This is very small at this point. k3 is so big now.
My stone at R10 seems to be pressuing white from the other side already, so it seems good to just prevent white from jumping into the corner.   **** You can't take it all, there is nothing wrong with letting white into the corner, especially since it will make both sides stronger for you, all you have to do is be willing to sacrificing the corner.
I don't know, but o4 seems quite bad. There are too many 4th line stones. N3 looks much nicer, and it prevents white from pinching your group.
Perhaps I should've continued the attack and aimed to split the white stones?
Here I'm aiming to split the white stones. I also considered an invasion at G3 at this point, which judging by the amount of territory I ended up letting white get in the bottom left seems like it might have been the better option.
Looking to contain white here.
Win a stone and some territory on the bottom.
Nope, this gives white the forcing move.
I want to use this threat to create a better position on the side.  *****  This makes white thick, there are much easier ways to get good position on the side, just p10.
Perhaps Q8 would be better?
Prevent a 3-3 invasion.  ***** almost prevent a 3-3 invasion.
White's potential in this corner was just getting too big. This move seemed a safe enough way to jump in and prevent it from getting too big.
Now you just made the corner for white big and strong.
And you got nothing for that.
Now white's floating group has plenty of room to live
I think this ill-conceived attack was one of my worst moves. I was looking at trying to cut the white stones apart and capture, but with the bamboo joint at O7, this seems silly in hindsight.
In saving the attacking stone, I've given white a great position toward the center and free run to reduce my territory in the top right.
nobody cares about that stone
I really needed to play here first. With this, white takes a nice lead in territory.
perfect. This is the perfect punishing move.
CUT! cut cut!
Doing what I can to reduce white's territory and increase my own.
okay, let's redo the end game from here.
Take sente moves first.
ouch
Stupid, stupid, stupid move. K2 gets the kill.
not a threat
I missed this chance to make one point entirely.
How was this move? Peter: Very good.
Is this the correct response given Black 2? Peter: This move is o.k. But I prefer to attack the white stone from the other side. This take advantage of the black stone in the lower left corner (see variations).
Peter: Because of the low marked white stone, I prefer A instead of Black 6.
Given the circumstances, how was Black 10? Peter: I think, this move is to much territory orientated. Early territory is a burden, because you always have to defend this points. While attacking your territory, your opponent is able to play in an active style an can force you into his own game. Besides. if you only play territory orientated moves, your opponent need not to worry about his own stones and he feel free to attack yours. Your opponent neither answer o17 nor e16. If you have sente, you should use it, to attack one of them. I prefer A, because the marked stone stands on the fourth line. The attack from this side helps you to close the left side (see variation).
Peter: I think: a white overplay. An extension on the left side is necessary (A for example).
Peter: Very good.
What are the disadvantages and advantages of this sequence for Black? Peter: This sequence is good for Black and the consequence of the White overplay g17 and the right response of Black d14.
Black 16 and 18 overplay? Peter: B16 is too passive! What do you worry about? Attack the lonely white stone from the other side to take the initiative! (see variation). You can sacrifice the marked stones, if you get such nice influence like in the variations.
Peter: Because of B16, B18 is the right continuation.
Was strengthening this corner a good idea? Peter: No it wasn´t: the two black stones are out of danger. But there are two weak white groups - attack them to take the initiative.
Peter: Very important point.
It felt as though Black needed to invade. Where should Black have played? Or was Black 32 correct? Peter: Yes, Black needs to invade and B32 looks as the very right point.
How do you feel about Black 34 and 36? Peter: B34 is the very right move. It splits the two white groups on the right edge. But because White A secure the lower right group, you should attack  the upper right group by separating it from the white group on the upper edge with B instead of B36.
Peter: White should play at A (see variation).
How should Black play here? Peter: The White cut seems to be a overplay. Black can live on the edge and leave White with the cut-aji at A (see variations).
Was it good for Black to give up 36 and 38? Peter: I think, that´s also possible, but compared to the situation, if you immediately attack at A, you first secure White in the lower right.
How do you feel about Black 46? Peter: I you have a look at the moves W74 etc., you will see, that you doesn´t get any eyeshape. You can sacrifice the 2 marked stones, because White already live in the lower right. Attack at A (see variation).
Peter: too late!
Peter: No value. Very slowly. Perhaps A instead or tenuki and B. If you worry about your own stones, play C immediately, but this helps White to connect his own stones.
Peter: Because White already live in the lower right,  B hasn´t any value. Play A (see variation).
Was Black 54 the best response or was there a bigger or more urgent point elsewhere? Peter: Because it´s sente for both sides, B54 is a good move (it´s a pity, that it was played very late).
Are there better moves for Black besides this cut? Peter: Now White is connected, the local battle is over. The cut is to small. Black A is very big, and as long as the White group in the upper left is in danger, the Black group in the upper left corner is saved.
Should Black have secured this area earlier? Peter: Have a look at the comment about B10. Black at B is very submissive. Don´t look one-sided after securing your own territory. After W63 the White group is saved and he gain much more territory as it is entitled to him. The White extension is one point too far, so I prefer to attack at A. The marked Black stones are strong - don´t worry about them. If you will win, you have to fight. You can´t win, if you already evade the fight.
Was the following sequence the correct answer to White 59?
Was there a bigger or more urgent point elsewhere? Peter: Play A: because of the triangle stone, the white group is in danger (see variation). B is a  second choice: White didn´t answer the rectangle stone, so B puts hard pressure on the White group.
Peter: A is correct shape instead of B66.
Peter: Better at A. Don´t fear the cut (see variation).
How do you feel about the sequence from White 73 to Black 80? Peter: You can´t get two eyes, so you should connect with A immediately.
Was White 81 necessary here? Peter: See variation to move B64.
How do you feel about the timing of Black 82? Peter: It´s a big point (see comment B64), but, it´s a pity - now the two Black groups are separate instead the two white groups. It´s the result of your defensive play.
Is there a better way to attack Black's group on the right? Peter: First White have to separate the two Black groups. W83 seems to work well, but because of  the possible cut (see 2. variation to move B86), perhaps White A is better (I'm not sure).
How do you feel about the sequence from White 85 to White 97? Peter: see next move.
Peter: Because of the follow until W93, play A immediately and see, what happens (see variation).
This move and the moves leading up to it seem to end terribly for Black. What should Black have done? Peter: Look at variation to B96.
Peter: Play at A (see variation).
Peter: you can´t hope to connect your both groups, so I prefer to secure first the left one with A. After that it can´t be helped, you have to run with your other group:  If White D, Black B. if White B, Black C (threats to capture one white stone with F, if white continue with E) For later there is your threat to cut wih G.
How should Black have played in this case? Peter: see comment W97.
Was Black 116 necessary at this time? Peter: I think, you can live without this move, but you have to sacrifice wether the triangle or the rectangle stones. I would try, to attack the white stones at the bottom, but now it´s difficult, because of the cut at A and heavy black group on the right.
How do you feel about the sequence from White 129 to Black 140? Peter: If the area around the mared black stones becomes white territorry, the game is over and you can resign immediately. So I would try to ignore W129 and fight with Black A (see variations).
Peter: bad shape, see W133 and 135. If you want to answer W129, play at A or B.
Peter: A,  B or C (see variation) are much bigger.
Peter. too small.
Black 190 should have been at P16.
How do you feel about the rest of the game from this point on? Peter: First you should play sente-moves like B, C, D (and after White E - F) and G and after that A is the biggest move. Don´t play moves like B208 (W211 not necessary), B220 (simply q13, don´t try to cut a bambus-style) After W141 the game was over. My piece of advise: Play in a more active (mark you: not aggressive) style, also against stronger opponents. In connection with your solid style, you wil get stronger.
DonValley [1k]: hi Reviewer:Hi, English is not my mother language, so please excuse my  mistakes.
johnny2bad [1d]: hi johnny2bad [1d]: gg
R:Both players did almost perfect move until this point.   The branch move should be better move in this stage (white ladder is not exist).
R:White did great mistake
what could i do here?
R:white 48 (1p) lost one move. ko is rightway as shown in the branch.
R: Again, white lost one move. right move is ko take (2N).
R:This move(2-B) was very good.
R:This move was reckless, because black  stones were splitted  to 3 parts(left upper corner, left side and 14 E,-F).
R: This point (18B)  was vital point.
R:As  black stones (14E,14F and 11E) are surrouned with strong white stones, these stones must give up at early stage. branch moves are better next
R:99 move was reckless move.
Can i kill w here? R: Now surronding white stones are so strong.  cant kill any stones.
i thought this was a mistake when i reviewed with my opponent
what's my best way here or am i dead?
did i make the right decision between a and b? R: A is right decision, though B move is about 15 points.
R:  A (11R) move was  bigger than this move (3J)
DonValley [1k]: oops johnny2bad [1d]: not happy with seki :) johnny2bad [1d]: thnaks DonValley [2k]: thx johnny2bad [1d]: i saw double ko and relaxed johnny2bad [1d]: it was fun DonValley [2k]: yeah johnny2bad [1d]: and if it stays seki? DonValley [2k]: u win R:white stones are living due to double ko.   Thanks.
artboy598 [9k]: thx] mehaha [7k]: gg
artboy598 [9k]: u2
NR: See variation.
NR: I think you let white feel safe very easily. Why not cross-cut? See variation at move 7.
NR: I think A or B would be good options.
would a better move be at o3? that seems slow to me now  NR: I tend to agree that it's a passive move.
NR: Here you have created a weak group for yourself (I think this is the group that you eventually got to lose..). At the same time, you are forcing white to attack your group on the left, which is also still not so strong.
NR: See variation. 1) Cut. 2) Connect. 3) Strengthen your groups!
This is the goup i so easily forgot about  NR: Indeed. It's the weak group that you created with the marked stones.
big move?  NR: Of course :)
NR: A stone at A would seem natural to me.
NR: See alternative.
NR: Why not pressure the white stone a bit? You could try to attack the invader.
i think this was a good invasion  NR: OK, but if you had played P17 first, you would not need to invade... See variation at move 61. Position as at variation 64 is preferable to current position. It's a similar position, without the marked exchanged stones.
NR: White captures 1 black stone as efficiently as possible, making great shape at the same time. Ponnuki
i don't know why I played that move. Stupid, I wanted to play Ko and don't know what possesed me. I was going to play at F8  NR: You are right. You should look for Ko threats. Though it would seem that white has bigger threats than black.
Why not connect at L19  NR: Because connecting cannot secure 2 eyes. White would eventually die; just bigger.
Should be at p2
I don't know what I was thinking and kept playing in his territory
I resigned here.  The other nodes where just me playing around. Again, Thank you!!!!
FishGo:This move was fashionable in the 70s to the 80s but Pros have completely abandoned it because of its weakness in shape.
FishGo:A,B,C seems to be better points for black.
FishGo: Not sure about this move, 3-3 is still open.  See variation.
FishGo: In my opinion, a little early.
FishGo:Bad exchange for black.
FishGo:White secured the corner and black got next to nothing.
FishGo: The pincer seems possible but I am not sure.  The marked group is not so weak and the large knight enclosure has some weakness.  Defending at A is also possible, see variation.
FishGo:This is invasion point at A with the large knights move.  After this move, black has a lot of points to choose to help this group.  For this reason it is hard for white to attack effectively now.
FishGo: A little slack, A, B or C are better choices.
FishGo: The white two space-extention has no "root".
FishGo:Defending at A also possible.
FishGo:Wrong move, A is joseki.
FishGo:Too greedy, should have connected with A, see vartaion.
FishGo:White is only escaping here.  Black can live by capturing at A.  White is too thin in the corner to start a fight.
FishGo:Mistake, there is bad aji in this move.  Better to connect at A.
FishGo:The cut at A, works, see variation.
FishGo:Uneccessary.
FishGo:White should play elsewhere.  See variations.
FishGo: White got close to nothing and ended up in Gote.
FishGo:White should take the chance to repair at A and aim at the marked weak points.
FishGo:A is still urgent.
FishGo:This move is small.
FishGo:This move is also small.
PM:  This move seemed unreasonable to me, and I thought I could take this advantage to invade the southwest side..unfortunately black held on to a large chunk of the bottom that I spent the rest of the game trying to break into.  FishGo:This move is rather unusual but at the least it expands black moyo.
FishGo:A wasted move.
FishGo: White needs to attack the marked group to justify the move at A. Ideally white would build influence around B thus reducing black's moyo.
FishGo: Wrong direction.    White should take the 3-3.  See variation.
FishGo:Black should definately block at A.  See variation.
FishGo:White needs to play A for life.
FishGo: Absolutely useless move.
FishGo:Now A is clearly urgent for both sides.  Well,  second to B that would kill the white group.
FishGo:Very small.
FishGo: Still not as big as A.
PM:  At this point I was starting to wish I had chosen the knights-move to enclose the corner...better response to this invasion?  FishGo: You responded all right and you had a chance to kill the group cleanly.  I can't say if the small knights move would be better, the problem is you had chances to defend but you didn't.  Black is very thick on the outside it is hard for white to come out in one piece.
FishGo:Black needs to play at to make a ko.
FishGo: White A is still ko.
FishGo:Small.  FishGo: Black is comfortably ahead here.  Both sides made some mistakes after.  White had a chance to kill a black group late in the game for which I included a variation.  In summary:  In fuseki, you have to pay more attention in making good shapes thus setting bases for development and combat later in the game.  You tend to play too lightly early in the game.  Hope you find this review useful.  Feel free to contact me if you have any more questions.  end of commentary.
PM:  I thought this was a gift, now I could save my J9 group..in the end it wasnt enough though.
here i was actually a bit suprised by his move. but thinking again this move is perfectly fine so i should not have been surprised.  You threatened his corner so he pulled back in defense.  Reasonable.  At this point I would have pulled back to the middle myself.  A or B for example.
here i'm not sure if getting in was the good thing to do or if i should have played at A  Now you've made a direct threat against his corner.  It gets you maybe 12 points.  However it gives black the opportunity to pull back further into the center giving him good influence there.  That's probably worth more than 12 points.
was it a good thing to expend to the middle here? it seemed ok because it reminded me of the joseki. but maybe i should have played at A  This move would have been nice earlier, but now you have no choice but to defend your stone in the corner.
That should have been your move.
here i was sure i lost the marked stone. maybe i should have tried to fight for it early on...  Yes, black forced you to fight for it.
This move gives you no territory at all.  At this point too much emphasis is being made on attacks.  There is still plenty of space around the sides and corners of the board.  A move at F3, for example, would give you at least 15 points!
maybe i was suppose to reinforce more at the upper right but it bugged me to leave so much empty territory unoccupied  It would bug me too.  I think this move is reasonable.
Black makes moves like these that convince me that you're the better player.
pincer
Another bad move by black.
this was supposed to be a blocking move. it showed its value later i think.  What's there to block?  Two stones in the corner is plenty for now.  Extending to the side with A or B would give you at least 10 points of territory in the bottom.
here i tought - jeez he lives so much territory unoccupied...  Make more moves like this early on.
was this the right thing to do at the moment? maybe i should have played A or B  Try to count the number of points it would give you.  The move you made gives you influence over 15 points of territory at least.  B gives you maybe 8 if black doesn't push up from the corner.  A gives some influence in the middle, but it's tenuous.
the thing from before that i didn't reinforce the upper right...  But you certainly didn't lose any stones.  Your territory here is secure, but it's small.
Always trace the ladder with you finger on the board to make sure it's really yours.  Your stone on N15 will be in atari on black's next move.  Try the variation I laid out.
here i was so darn busy being happy about my ladder that i didn't notice that! here i probably should have played A!
i don't know if this was a good spot to use the tiger mouth because of black A later. but it did gave me some more middle territory than if i just played B.  Yes, but there's so much more territory left at the bottom!  Here you didn't have a choice, but keep that in mind.
did A was better? i think this moved showed value later.  You could have moved at A, and your opponent would have still kept pushing into the middle.  This is a good move to steal some territory that is still up for grabs on the right side.  However, it's a bit too aggresive and difficult to defend as you found out.
black respoded where i should have responded earlier,,,
this moved seemed the right one to do as i wasn't sure yet that i'll win the race capturing the 3 black stone.  Count the liberties.  The black group has two, and your group has three.  Moreover, black can't move at P6 before moving at O6, so you'll have some warning.
This move should have been made ages ago!
was A better? i don't think so cause it could have drive that spike to my territory.  Yes.  In general three stones in a diagonal is a very weak formation.
here he saw the net i prepared... pitty.
was A better? closing at B later?  What about pushing in from R11?  How about the territory in the lower left?
the jump here was good i think. better than just closing at A
was i playing too open? it looked safe to me but apperently it wasn't.  It's a reasonable move if you're afraid of losing K6.
That was a ko.  No need to fill it yet.
Why respond to black's moves when you can make him respond to yours?  See the variation.
should have played at A probably but then he could have played at my place (B). was it a good call?  Neither.  Black's formation is so weak, go for N1.
i don't know if this was a good move. couldn't think of anything better. playing at A might have been better. letting him to take the marked stone but building wall to the right.  Playing at the bottom is almost never a good move.  His pyramid formation is still there for the taking.  Take that and the rest will follow.
stupid me. should have seen it and play at A
this looked like a good spot to close with two knight moves from the marked stones.
i gusse again i made the same mistake and should have closed at A, strenghtening my wall.
it came out ok toughe...
here i really hoped he wouldn't see it...
this was aimed at building a group with 2 eyes.
can't see the point of his move as this is a dame point...
what i'v been afraid off. probably should have played there earlier...
should i have played at A? didn't want to let him go to the bottom but thinking again the marked stone are problematic also...  Continue extending those stones as they're in jeapordy!
seeing what happaned next i guess i should have played A.
my stones are dead... was there a way to save them?  Not anymore.
tried to save but only made it worse. should have played A to block and connect.
i was already dead so this move was pointless isn't it?  Yep.
i was really afraid he'll play there from earlly on. couldn't find a good time to play there...  Are you worried about the three stones surviving?  They only have two liberties, and this move doesn't change that.
wanted to envade the right side. he left it unguarded and it looked like a good opprotunity.   This should have been done long ago before black managed to take most of the center territory.
if he played at A could it be a problem for me? i tought that if he playes A i'll play B so i'll be ok.  Not a problem that I can see.
i guess his stones where already dead but i felt i should take security measurements.  Trust your intuition and make a more meaningful move like R14.
it was clear i'll have to play A later but it helped me to lower his territory.
here i was sure that if he closes i can't kill the group and he'll have 12 points of territory and my nice walls would be a waste.  His extending to the wall has no relevance whatsoever.  You need to lookout for the eyes.  "Two eyes you live one eye you die."
so i closed. i think this was the best move i could make at the moment.
i was determined to make sure he can't make eyes there.
closed the hole to be quite.  This is more of an endgame move.  There's still the big chunk at F14 going right that you need to take.
if he takes Q1 he makes 2 eyes so it was dangerus. i'm glad i didn't miss that.
this move was pointless i guesse. the group was already mine. or was there a way to save it?  It is a pointless move for black.
should i have played this move? even if he took the marked stone i could just play A.  Trust your instinct.  This move got you nothing.
i wanted to make sure i can guard my upper territory.  Good, but touching a group of stones with one lonely stone is dangerous.
again, i have a weakness for double atati. maybe i should have played there and let him take the marked stone. this move eventually made me lose the upper territory.  You should have never touched his group with the lonely stone.  Moving at F14 then going right would have been safer.
making sure he can't escape with the net. was it a good move?  How could one lonely stone push through your formation?  Worry more about your group at L17.  This move lost you the game.
later it came to me that i just lost a huge group of stones by helping him build that wall...
at this point i don't know why but i had to play and see if i can get some of that corner. probably it was a pointless suicide.  No such thing.  The endgame is a good time for trying things out.  Especially since we're not professionals there are a lot of moves we need to figure out by trial and error.  And since we're pretty much at the endgame now, these moves don't really lose you points unless your opponent passes.
Black is pulling at straws.  It's very dangerous to touch a stone, so try a more defensive approach.  See the variation.
i can't point what was the best way to attack his stone.
You can see how touching the stone doesn't really help.
Three stones in a diagonal is very dangerous.  See the variation.
for some reason i thought i can prevent him from making eyes by playing there. i guess with group this big its pointless... is it?  Yep.
wanted to keep some of my territory there.
again, invading my territory.  Again, don't touch his stone.
That's way to deep to be able to protect that stone.
here i saw that again,  i lost a corner. i need to work about fighting corners.  You haven't lost it yet.  See the variation.  Also check out goproblems.com which has a lot of practice trials that will help with this.
here i wanted to make sure i have some protection. i was afraid of losing this spot too.
this was a poinltess move of his? the corner was already his...
DG: I don't find this such an atractive move, as it leaves the weakness of A on Black. Maybe a shimari or an attack on o3.
JWS: Maybe a defence on the fourth row is more consequent with the 4-4 stones?  DG: I think this is the propper move. The fourth line move isn't for defence purpouses.  Guo Juan said once that the fouth row move is for moyo purpouses, however I can't find any chances for a future moyo. This solid move is the best. There's nothing wrong with the third line defence. You prepare yourself for A or B.
DG: Great move for W. Very heart breaking for Black's plans. Maybe A should be at B.
DG: This is an unpropper move because of the shape and the effect it has on the balance of points.  The empty triangle position is very doubious. Also, the move at d4 wont give B any points.
JWS: I didn't finish the joseki because black didn't play on d5 or c6 and because I would become overconcentrated on the bottom.
DG: a nice move. A is also alright.
JWS: Should I have put more pressure on M16. Or is getting more strength for the o17-group better?  DG: Very hard. If you're confident about your group you may play this way. However I would play m18 now.
DG: B is playing a very dangerous game. He should let go some stones... Now Black doesnt have eyes, W has eyes on the right. and if W plays c15 he got all the corner of the hoshi.  Look at move 21 ideas for more...
JWS: Until now I was quite happy. Is that justified?  DG; yes, you're happy. but playing this kind of far move leaves B some possible aji. W may want to play A or B. I would do A and hope that B starts a fight at B, because he would have two weak groups, the one at B and the upper one. B would be madness for B until he fixes the small group at the top.
DG: This is an idea however I would try E17, because this leaves B with too many troubles as it makes more weak groups.
JWS: Here I didn't know very good what to do. In the end I put pressure on black's weak group from my strong group. That should'nt be good, isn't it?  DG: I think it's far more helpful to attack the weaker stone right now. You don't know how will your benefit from h15
DG: very slow move. This was the right time for c16
DG: There's a trick on the shape B may want to try
DG: You may want to keep it simple, you're wining. Also A is an idea for attacking, i would love to play A.
Without a stone at Q10 I probably should of blocked on the other side.  --  N: absolutely this is an elementary mistake mistake in direction no 3k should make anymore. If there is anything you should remember from this game, it should be this. You block only from this direction with a black stone at (or around q10.
Was debating between this and N5  --  N: Ok here you remembered about the q10 stone, but it is too late now. Hard for me to say wether the variation is better, both are not ideal for black.
N: painfull
N: the black shape has many weak points now.
Maybe H/J3 instead?  --  N: see variations and the proverb: don't play close to thickness.  Think about why you played this move: did you want to save one stone??  Did you attack something with this move? Do you make territory with this move? Does it solidify a corner?
N: white is happy to split two groups
N: are you attacking white? Your black group does not seem strong enough for a forcefull attack.
N: you should only play this way when you know the joseki.
N: now you should be definetely behind
N: asking for a splitting attack
N: looks like a mistake
I had a threat on top, so should I of connected?  --  N: Connecting seems better, but this is difficult. It is more important to understand the other (easy) mistakes you made.
N: here you play from the wrong direction, you should focus on securing your moyo. If white captures some weak black center stones, this is not bad.
N: this is terrible for black.  Only one comment left on the end of the game. Most important mistakes are already pointed out.
I misread here, I thought the P5 connection would work against R5  --
Even without white killing here, white is ahead by alot.  Black resigns.  Thanks  --
feels like the right direction
this seems like a fine move,but perhaps playing around d12 is better?  klin: This is better than D12.
klin: H14 is too slow.  Should attack at H12 directly.
klin: E11 still should attack at K11.
klin: White C12 should escape at J11 or J12.
klin: BE9 should play at E10.
klin: Now B's previous moves E11, D11, C11 all look bad.
klin: Before N6, B should make the T2 S1 exchange.
klin: B's shape is very bad here.
klin: R7 is bad.  If played at R5, the group probably won't die.  Agaian, the T2, S1 exchange helps.
klin: N9 attacks from the wrong direction. B should play at N8, W N9, M9, M10, L10.  With the threat to cut the left W dragon, B's group has a sceured eye in the middle.
there is still corner aji,but i felt i need to cut
klin: Now all white groups are connected.  B is in danger.
greedy,i guess i had to give up those 2 stones
klin: B's last chance to live is play at S6.  If W R5, B T7 giving up 3 stones.  If W T7, B R5, at least can get a "both alive".  No futher comment beyond this point.
Please review for the black side.
I've been told that 2nd row moves are bad. What do you think? When playing with the handicap stones you want to use the stoes to put pressure on white. Initially play "big" points which give you a moyo - as framework to use to subsequently fight white - put pressure on white.A, B and C are natural points to play at this stage. D and F , E and G are possible but they are miai - if black plays F white can play D for example, and then you'll play  H - Gote.
I wanted to block this piece, but wasn't sure how. Is this an okay move?
The marked stone is poor shape - empty triangle - it's inefficient. why not play A - what is your fear?  Do not get pressed down. Go is about the race to get ahead - read Kageyama's book!
I did a jump to try to prevent white from invading. contact play make both sides stronger and instigates a fight. White can still invade - at A, B, C, D. E Play F if you wish, but better is G, C or H
Another territory-saving attempt Not really - first you have no firm territory to save, second your stone is floating - it's only very weakly connected to D4,   Look at Kareyama's secrets of handicap Go.
your move does not threaten anything, so play A to make eye shape AND threaten B.
Created a wall
Stopped cut possibility
Why? your black group is wek and heavy, and white has just taken away your base.A or B better.
Tried to position myself to cut through the white stones Solid connection at A is better - counmt liberties you want to outnumber your opponent's liberties in a fight.
white is playing equally poor moves - hardly helpful. 28 is poor A, B or C are better. At this stage I'd look at C or D
what a pointless exchange - how many pooints of territory did you get for playning 30 at H19? A is much more use - any entension from white's wall is over concentrated.
Created a cut preventing prevention
Boxed in
Surrounded white No you haven't he's got ample room to live   A, B or C are the points to play
Poor - now your corner stome is weak. can you feel the strength of white's stones starting to threaten ther marked stone?
AxSqrd [?]: What rank are you? kimko: 25
AxSqrd [?]: 25 kyu?
kimko: Yes. And you? AxSqrd [?]: 30k, but I'd be lower if it existed… ^ ^;;
white should play Q18 and steal the corner this was poor play by both sides.
Another wall
Tried to wall on the otherside
68 had no value
Tried to atari white, but I didn't realize I self-ataried.
why 74 at D13? you are strong  A, B or C !!!!!
why play 76 - what is the threat? now you've lost any base for the stomes marked X
Where are your eyes in marked stomnes?
AxSqrd [?]: Ah, okay
kimko: Thanks.
AxSqrd [?]: Any time, unless you happen to let me win! :D
Capture - poor play by white
Two eyes
Capture
Wall
Barrier and capture! :D
More territory claims
Almost surrounded
Didn't see atari
why you played 204 in the corner is beyond my comprehension.
Ladder
Didn't see that coming… ^ ^;;
a lot of your play is difficulty to undedrstand - the small captures and contact play - you appear to think that capturing stones is important - it isn't. The treat of killing is.   Learn life and death learn what sente is - its a threat to kill or take territory or to separate.  Connect stomes, count libertoies, make eyes.
* This move by Black is surely a big point, but this leaves a weakness at A, which may be exploited later.
* I do not like R6 very much. Locally, Black has excellent options. If you want to approach, I'd therefore recommend going for R3, so that your G3 stone works a bit more efficiently.  * More importantly, I think that attacking the corner should not be your first option. Black has indeed two weak groups on the board, while all your stones are safe. What about attacking them and try making free points in the process? See variations.
* Answering R5 is not necessary, White's life is not endangered, and you're not protecting big territory either. You may play elsewhere.
* N4 would have been a better move.
* That cut is very powerful ! Both players overlook the aji of R6.
* White N4 is strong. Black has to decide whether to protect from the P4 tesuji or from the M2 cut.
* Excellent move! The Black group may now be enclosed.
* Dangerous. The Black group is not alive yet, White can still play N1 and start a ko.  * The overall situation is not so good for Black, with 3 weak groups and a fourth one depending on a ko to live.
* Good shape, but starting the ko at N1 is best. Black has indeed lots of weak groups, you have therefore an infinite supply of ko threats.
* Urgent move by Black.
* Both Black and White groups are already alive, blocking here does not achieve much. You may play elsewhere (A or B would be good choices).
* Good move, that isolates the central floating Black group.
* Trying to connect forcefully makes Black too thin. H9 is correct for Black, here.
* Instead of cutting, consider the proposed variation.
* Now, Black has a splitting attack on two White groups.
* Good move, which helps your own group while attacking the Black one.
* That cut is strange. It seems to me that White has nothing to fear and can go all out against the Black group, turning at J10 (the Black group does not look completely alive, with its fragile eyespace).
* We enter yose. You have to find sente moves, then take reverse sente moves. The 25-points ko at N1 still remains.
* Black has too many stones around for this invasion to succeed. A, B and C are usual sente moves.
* Instead of S10, protecting at Q11 looks more solid for Black.
* Note the bulky five area. The vital point for killing this group is S11.
* Good, you have a ko !
* Playing N1 now gives you a double ko; one of the groups is yours.
* Why not play the ko? Now you're dead.
* White eventually starts the big ko.
* Black, by refusing the ko, is now dead.
* Good!
* K1 not necessary to kill.
* This is overplay.
* C1 is wrong (atari at D2 was fine). Now Black has a nice sequence.
* Black misses the kill! G2 was needed here. Now, White has a tesuji to escape his dull destiny...
* ... but unfortunately misses it! Consider G1 instead of H1 (Black has tricked you using shortage of liberties - pay him back)   :)  * There are no further comments from this point on.
SH: this is an opening i use to play [see my sensei's page for info why :)  ]
SH: too bad :( w P17 is more fun :(  CG: Well, I can understand white's reasoning. This is a save way to play, and the variations of the Taisha-Joseki starting with P17 are very complicated.  To quote Miyamoto Sensei: Know the Taisha but don't play it!
SH: is this move correct? or is q13 better?  CG: This move is correct.
SH: mistake... w should o15 in sente  CG: Yes. Now the result is favourable for black because of the remaining ladder aji.
SH: white still has some ladder aji  CG: Yes, the aji is bad.
SH: is this big enough? or better approach the top left corner?  CG: Since your stone at R13 is on the third row, the right side is not so important. An approach move at E16 might be bigger. But I don't think the difference is very big.
CG: I think that for white it's also more important to enclose the upper left.
SH: 4th line for better interaction with b q10  CG: I don't see a black stone at Q10, and I don't think Q10 is an important move for black right now since it would be too near to R13. The upper left is still more important.
SH: is c11 better?  CG: That's a hard question. C11 might be slightly better, but in the game C10 is perfect ...
CG: ... since this is the wrong direction.
CG: This move combines an extension with an attack on the corner. This is very good for black, so white C12 was wrong.
SH: is this a good move? black gets heavy, but overall he also gets stronger and white needs to be careful with A  CG: I agree that this is a dubious move. White is trying to get sente, but this leaves bad aji again (which you spotted correctly).
CG: I think this is a bad idea. You are ahead in territory, so you should be careful that you don't help white creating a big moyo at the top. By invading immeadiately, you help him to build thinkness. Just playing Q9 would be better.
CG: Overplay.
SH: is this move correct?  CG: Most important is to avoid giving white sabaki. I think your move is good, but Q4 might be even better since it makes it harder for white to run away.
CG: Too heavy.
SH: this seems like the wrong direction b should try to contain instead like, b o8  CG: The question is how you can use your thickness after white lives (see variation). Denying white a base and chasing him while taking territory is good enough.
CG: Running on neutral points like this is painful.
SH: i was not going to kill him i just wanted to see in what direction he turns  CG: What would you do if white attaches at L9? I think H7 is dubious. What is wrong with K9?
CG: Wrong direction. I think L9 is the move here.
SH: reduce first....
SH: can black another move here in sente?  CG: Well, was J15 really sente? I you want to continue, you can play J16.
SH: ....then take the corner
CG: ?? I think A17 is the only move here.
SH: this move seems ok, but can't black play a better move here? maybe just f7?  CG: I don't see why f7 should be better.
CG: This move is not important, and I don't think it's sente (F5 and L9 are miai). I would rather move at the top (J12).
CG: I think this is a mistake. You are just harming J15.
SH: this is a mistake, right?  CG: Yes.
SH: too heavy? i did not see any way to come out lightly  CG: Because it's nearly too late to come out at all ...
SH: is this white move correct? i think white should instead try to contain me  CG: If he tries, he must kill you. Maybe he was not confident enough he could.
CG: This is strange. If white wants to kill, J16 was a mistake. Now it seems to be too late.
SH: mistake... black needs to run out, right?  CG: Definitely!
SH: i hoped to come out somehow  CG: You hoped fo a wonder like in the upper left?
SH: misread. very stupid
SH: i tried to force white to kill my stones so i could at least reduce the top left  CG: I don't see how ;-)
CG: This is bad.
CG: ???
SH: i was very happy with this  CG: You were very lucky ...
CG White should resign after such a blunder.
too small?
SH: is this white move big? i'd probably play F14 as white  CG: Allowing black B2 does not make white happy. The game is over anyway.
SH: sente, w should f15 now
SH: he did not read carefully :(  CG: Why should he start reading NOW?
SH: The game ended here, black won by resignation.  i think i was leading even with white responding correctly. is this correct?  CG: Yes, black was ahead anyway. It is usually a bad idea to continue a serious game after a mistake like white 90.
I really have no idea what I'm doing in the beginning, so I generally just play corner-sides, as you can make life more easily, but without really knowing what my moves are doing.  jet: it's a somewhat valid strategy when you're new to only play the star-point fuseki.  Once you see how they influence the board, then move on to the other openings.  I say it's only somewhat valid because you should at least have some idea what they do eventually.  In the 20kyus it doesn't hurt to just play the stars though.
Looking back on it, I wasn't sure about this move, and it was (to me), pretty much a choice of going here or somewhere around Q10. I think I chose here because I was afraid of white playing around here and disconnecting my stones. I was generally just not sure about what to do here.  jet: no, this move is great.  Really, I would have chosen a slightly different order.   The san-ren-sei is the best choice for new players.  So is the double wing.  This fuseki is perhaps not the best, but the K16 is almost *necessary* now so your Q16 and D17 stones have something to work with.  In my opinion you have a much better position than white at the moment -- even if it's not a standard opening.  Is there such a thing as a standard opening in Go?  Certainly some are more popular.  I created a fork (back at move 2) with some additional comments.
Here I was thinking that I should try and keep white close to that wall, and try and shut him off from the bottom and the center.  jet: it's difficult to affect white with a move like E13.  It's too high to be connected to anything and it doesn't really threaten him in any meaningful way.  It's better to put E13 at C13, which is a pincer or hasami.  Then white only has two choices: live in the corner (small) or try to jump up out of there .... and then you get to chase him.  Check the variation.  None of the resolutions on the variation are perfect, but you can maybe see my ideas.
Looking at it now, this move doesn't seem to good to me =]  jet: It's pretty small.  it's not the worst move ever, but it's not big.  Before the middle game, all your moves should be either immediately urgent or more than 15 points worth of moyo.  When you're new it's really hard to tell what's worth 15 points or what's urgent....  But consider the move at Q10.  The double wing is worth a ton and nobody got there yet!
I responded to quickly here, I think, and missed the wC17 move coming up, would it have been better to play C17?  jet: the very best moves tenuki and play somewhere really big, like Q10, O4, or R6.   I like Q10 the best, but if you must dfend the corner, then C17 is acceptable.  Remember that the third line is "the line of defeat." Third line territory is easy to defend, but it's small by comparison, so if you're building third line territory, you're only getting two or three points for each stone you play.   Look for moves that are worth at least 15 at this stage of the game.  D14 doesn't seem to do much of anything accept convince white to fix the hole in his shape...  It's never good to convince your opponent to make a better shape.
I wasn't quite sure what to do with the previous move, so I played here, hoping to push him back.  jet: if your goal is to cover him and keep him pinned in, then this might just work.  But the entire right side of the board is uncontested by either side.
I didn't expect this move at all when I was thinking, and I think I played a bit sloppier afterwords.  jet: I believe white intends for htis move to be kikashi. I'm not so sure it is, since a kikashi move would be something really urgent.  Still, I haven't looked at move 23, but I'm hoping you connected.
good.
jet: too close.  Surround on a larger scale.  I'm going to move move-25 to e16...
Looking at it now, F9, G10 and H13 look too thin now, but I'm not sure what I could've done differently.   jet: yes, differently.  Think bigger.  If you make the wall along the line K, you get influence along the right and you surround white in a powerful way.  Dual purpose moves are the best.  Definitely try to surround on a larger scale, and preferably find a way to influence the rest of the board to your advantage at the same time.
I was unhappy with this outcome, as white has a good shape and position I believe, and to me looks like black is just sitting there.  jet: white actually has one of the very best shapes.  I belive it counts as a ponnuki with a tale -- or that closely related cousin.  Again, all of this uncomfortable outcome is because you surrounded too closely, allowing white to punch through.  Surrounding from a distance gives you the time to connect with the stones you already have there (like K16).  Connected stones are much stronger than randomly arranged ones.
Here I was glad that I read it through and didn't save the marked stone, instead playing so that I could save the five stones above it.
Here, I was just trying to secure life for my stones. Looking at it now, however, it seems that white controls most of the bottom of the board, and possibly the right side.  jet: false.  The right side is still uncontested and you have a better claim for it since you have more influence there.  assuming you can shore up the hole at M15 and can somehow make the very weak J10 stones live, you have sortof a wall there and that's a huge advantage along the right.  Pretend the squares are dead and the triangles are your wall.  Well, then if white tried to approach at Q14, you could hasami at Q12.  Chase white up to your wall and laugh at the fact that he has nowhere to go!
I don't really know why I played this, as it just seems a waste of a move now.  jet: it's not the best move, no,  but it does claim some territory on the side.  It's not a total loss.  I tend to make at least one 0-point move every game, so don't feel bad.  I've been playing for 6 years.  It's hard to focus 100% with so much hard work to do.
Now I started seeing that white looked liked it was controling  most of the board, and that my stones near the center might be in danger again.   jet: they were in danger before, but so were his.  If O17 was at M10, it might look a lot different?  Remember the discussion back at move 69?
I tried extending down to keep white from making more moyo, I think it is, than he already had.  jet: this move desperately wanted to be played as far back as move 9.  I like it.
jet: don't do this.
jet: This is korrigatachi.  It means dumpling or useless or something like that.  You've got 10 or 12 stones here that are doing literally nothing.  Try not to let this happen.  When it was four dying stones it was almost better to leave them to die and go do something else.  You can always threaten to use them later (aji).  Leaving dead stones to use later is one of those advanced tricks that gets you to the Dan level.  While white is busy killing your 4 or 5 stones you could maybe be taking 15 points per move elsewhere.  That's worth while.  It's hard to know which 4 stones to let die and which you should make live, but if you can find a move bigger than the 4*2=8 points your opponent would get from killing them... well, go get the bigger move.  His 8 points is maybe only worth 2 or 4 if you can use the stones for infuence later (even if they stay dead).  Aji is tricky stuff.  But it tastes good.
Here, I wasn't much worried about those stones dieing, and mostly played there to stop me from having to make 3 moves to connect them all.
jet: p0wned.  I think white could have lived before this.  It would have been pretty tricky, but now white is dead I think.
jet: I sincerely thought black was in more trouble than this.  You fought your way out.  Heh.  I bet white was mad.
Now this doesn't seem like a good move to me, and that it would have been better play play at R11 instead.  jet: correct.  You also want ot make sure to use your l7 and j6 stones to spread into white's HUGE moyo along the bottom while you still can.  Perhaps you do, we'll see.
Now I started really getting worried about white at the bottom, as he almost completly owns it  jet: almost.  Although, 4th line stones are notoriously difficult to make territory with.  You can live at R3, O4, Q2, O3, et al (even without the J6 and L7 stones to run to).
I think this move here is what started me playing so that I ended up with a big ugly clump of stones, and white still holds all that territory.  jet: or you should learn to play lighter.  Let me go back and show you what I mean.  Find the variation.
For shame, I didn't see the blatant atari in front of my eyes, although, in the end, I'm not sure that it was such a bad thing.
jet: oh dear, white is dead.  I fear he may flim flam you here.  [ahh, happily, I was wrong.]
I was really happy with my playing in this corner so far, until I saw wP17, which I believe would have allowed white to save his stones and live, fortunatley, he didn't see it.
Here I killed instead of connecting at P17. Is one better than the other, or does it matter?  jet: I believe the points owrk out the same.  Don't take my word for it.  Use an SGF editor and count it out all the various different ways and then find some way to consider it in your mind's eye while you play.
Again, killed instead of connecting.  jet: given the choice (if the point tally is the same either way); go for the kill.  You don't want to leave that Aji behind for no reason!!
And again.
Really don't know why I played here. Hopefull thinking on my part, I guess.  jet: ironically, I think you could have killed white by playing at T18.  I'm not really sure. [nope, perhaps a few moves ago though.]
This move starts off the part of the game which I regret most. I feel really stupid looking back on it.  jet: no worries.  As long as your opponent responds, you don't lose any points!  (check)
Ugh. Just ugh. I /really/ don't know why I though I could kill this stone.
Really don't like this move, although I'm not too sure where else I should have played. Now I'm thinking around J3 or some such.
jet: still haven't really lost any points, although, extensions from K4 would have perhaps earned some points instead of gaining none.
Now, this move seems really bad to me. I think it would have been better played somewhere around G4. I don't know why I though I could invade here.
And here's where I finally realize that the group is dead.  12 wasted stones.
Even more wasted stones!
jet: I guess you gained something after all.  White just made a negative one point move there.
From here on I generally just try to strengthen and secure my groups.  jet: this is negative one point too.  Don't kill dead stones.  But since white just did it, you're even.
jet: again
jet: again, still even
jet: again, you're up by one.
jet: again! up by two!
jet: dame, still up by two.
jet: negative 1 for you.  only up by one.
jet: oh, you're even again. :(
jet: negative three, you're down by one.
jet: down by two.
jet: another negative.  You're only down by one.
jet: down by two again.
jet: down by one.
BinX [11k?]: hi BinX [11k?]: good game
vib [10k]: hi gg
Z: the ordinary direction for B to expand his lower left shimari is along the left side, so W might be better off limiting that extension with a move around A.
Z: this allows B the opportunity to either close the corner at A with big profit, or ignore W's purely defensive move.
Z: wrong direction.  left side bigger.  it's also gote, as W doesn'y have to respond in order to live.
I didn't think that he would attack the corner by both sides in this situation...  Z: this is a typical high handicap game move by W, looking to provoke trouble.  it's an overplay in an even game. simplest answer is at A.
Z: attachment is for defence, but B should be thinking about attack.  there is a wide gap between the two marked stones.
with this corner - maybe too slow ? - I thought I can attack the L3-O3 stones and keep them separated from the R8 group, or tenuki and take a big point.  I chose to attack...  Z: you did?! this looks like a purely defensive move to me.  anyway, triangled stones are more vulnerable than the squared ones.
Z: unnecessary.  A better.
Z: also unnecessary. if W now plays A, all B will have achieved is separating two strong groups.
Z: probably a good idea to keep from being fenced in, but the right side is more urgent and the left side more valuable.
Here I misread, I don't even thought that he could connect underneath... To my shame I guess.  Z: no shame in Go!  just mistakes of judgement :)
Z: ugly
Z: uglier!
Z: of course!
Z: the worst move of all so far.  it is worth maybe 2 points, whereas sente in the opening is worth about 30 points
I'm a bit stubborn when I fail... bad habit...  But I think that I could use the sente to approach the san-san. It's the first time that I have to do this sort of approach, so I'll accept all your tips. I'll explain my thoughts.  Z: this is not sente.  see variation.
I thought against san-san, I had to take good influence... so I tried...  Z: wrong direction.  split the right side instead.
I'm not proud of this move, because I was thinking that he will play something low, without even thinking that he could simply separate my two stones...  Z: right.  good that you see this.
But I guess I'm lucky ?  Z: nope.  by leaning on you here, W prepares to spring on the upper side.  his triangled stones can still escape to the centre by jumping to A.
Z: overambitious.  you can't do everything at once.
Z: fair, but see how the extension is narrower than it should have been.
Z: quite good, but there is still a weakness at A, so not very good.
Z: slow.  top side more important now.
Z: yuk!  both players are playing with narrow vision.  The big points are still open.
at this point, I thought that attack this group would hurt me... There may be a way though...  Z: see my previous comment
Z: at last! but if i were B here, i would probably prefer to use the triangle stones to try for a moyo on the uper centre, starting with A
Z: hasty.  if B gets his moyo, the game will be difficult for W.  Instead, maybe A, pressing B down and building strength for a later invasion around B.
Z: thoughtless.  W already has an extension along the left side, so B won't have time to complete the normal joseki at A.  See variation.
Z: pincers are for attack, but should be made with support on the other side.  here, B is provoking W to pincer his  triangled stones in return.  See variation on W's next move.
Z; yes.
Z: no.
Z: yes
Z: no.
Z: no
Z: ah well, i make blunders like this too sometimes :)
Z. no.
Z: no.
I'm not sure of P17 here... I think it's an error.  Z: :) making a dango is usually pudding-headed :)
Really bad reader...
So I left my invading stones, thinking "don't be stubborn..."
I thought that I could give this game for a review when I saw this move, I had no idea of dealing with it.  Z: this is a very poor move by W.  It is too far from the wall to be securely linked and just invites B to build territory while threatening to eat it.  See variation.
I threat separation, but I'm thinking "keep territory"
When I see this move now, I have the impression of asking white to play G5...  This move was here to guard left territory, but I guess I'm too greedy ?  There is no way that white let me take a so huge corner... I think I'd play G5 myself now...  Z: see my previous comment
Z: another example of narrow thinking. saving one stone is only worth 2 points.
I misread the ladder, but, at  this point, I thought that I could use this four stones to separate the O8 group from here...  Z: saving 3 stones is only worth 6 points.  no further comments.
And I guess he didn't see it... because it will not die (normally).
And I win because of this move...
vib [10k]: thx BinX [10k]: thanks
daveadams: I think you'd be better off responding at F4 or C5 (see variations)
jeff: how do you feel about this move?  daveadams: I think it's too heavy and too slow. If you had a stone at G4 or H4 this would be a better looking move, but you are too far from K4 to play so heavy. Black doesn't take advantage, but he probably could  C2 is the right response to Black's attachment. See variation.
daveadams: Your lower side is getting very strong, but notice that you don't have any stones above line four, while Black is spreading out all over the board. This is a dangerous situation.
daveadams: Capping the black stones on the R line does you no good since they can just expand up the board towards the Q16 stone. P6 would at least have been expanding your influence, but P8 is too far away given R6 to really feel connected to your stones on the bottom.  Better I think to have played your P8 stone as a kakari on one of the top two Black stones and spread out your stones a bit more.See variations.
jeff: where should white have played instead?  daveadams: I think G3 is the right play locally, and it turned out fine for white.
daveadams: It's a little early to play here. At most this saves you 5-8 points in the endgame, while the whole top of the board is empty except for some Black stones.  Also, notice Black's thickness (squared stones) facing up the board towards D16. He can use that thickness to stop invasions and project power up the board. This type of position, with White so low and Black wrapping around two sides, getting the corner and building a big wall facing out, is unquestionably far better for Black.  Given Black's wall and White's lack of presence on the left and top, now might be a good time to play a miai move like C11 (see variation).
daveadams: This move gives a nice strong shape, but it's a tiny, tiny move compared to what's available on the board. This early in the game, whenever you are not immediately threatened by Black's play, you should look for big moves to play elsewhere on the board. Don't get sucked into the trap of just focusing on the part of the board where Black played last. You want to take the initative.
daveadams: Here, Black played a huge point while White is still playing small moves at the bottom.
daveadams: Tiny move.
daveadams: One point move at most.
daveadams: You are very strongly connected now, but the stones at P8 aren't doing anything for you. They aren't projecting influence, attacking Black, or surrounding territory.
daveadams: Tiny move.
daveadams: Small move. If Black never blocks at S5, you'll get at most eight points from this.
daveadams: Black expands his framework, playing another big move.
jeff: how do you feel about this move?  daveadams: It's a decent choice for an invasion in that area. The fourth line is optimal I think, since you should be aiming not to make territory there, but to run out and connect, but White is in dire straights. You should have played in this area long before.
daveadams: You captured a few Black stones, and destroyed Black's wall, but he already got his use out of it, and White only gets eight points. Meanwhile, Black E10 kills your D10 stone and makes Black's moyo look incredibly strong.
daveadams: This move is not tiny, but it is the wrong play. You should be invading Black's moyo. Nothing is more important right now.
daveadams: Black is not playing the best moves, but with this move, do you see how he's built a huge moyo covering half the board and controlling six star points? This is White's worst nightmare.
daveadams: Attaching like this will make Black stronger, and since you have plenty of room to play, you should look for broader moves. I would invade at M17 and use the M11 stone as a target to connect back to.
daveadams: Like I said, attachment makes Black stronger.
daveadams: Too far if you are trying to stay connected, given Black's stone at J10.
daveadams: Bad move, you should have connected at K12.
daveadams: Black has cut you off. Your J12 stones are dead if they can't make two eyes.
jeff: was this a good time to play this kind of a move?  daveadams: At this point in the game, it's necessary for White to play desperately. The right time to play in the vicinity of H17 would have been about 50 moves back. Also, when you invade you should have a plan for making life or getting connected. M17 would have a better chance of connecting up to the M11 stones. You might connect to H11, but it doesn't have life yet either.
daveadams: You lived, but Black played poorly.
daveadams: what would happen if white had given up these stones?  The stones look dead and purposeless at this point. It's okay to sacrifice stones if you use them to achieve a bigger goal. Perhaps these stones helped you create life up top in which case they are no longer needed. And you should leave them alone. Their aji might serve you later on.
daveadams: Now you have cut off any chance of expanding your M11 stones into Black's territory and you have a new big heavy group that needs life badly with very little room to expand.
jeff: what is a better place for this stone?  daveadams: I think C17 is what you are looking for. See variation.
daveadams: Turns out Black let you get a big corner, but I still think C16 was a bad play.
jeff: what should white do in this case?  daveadams: Not sure what you are asking. White is playing inside Black's strong territory. White should have immediately defended at T3, because Black S3 could be huge.
daveadams: In the end you were able to make life along the top and secure quite a bit of territory. Given Black's moyo, it was a very unlikely thing. Still it looks like White lost by 20 or 30 points, mainly because in the opening stages, white kept playing on the bottom while Black took huge point after huge point at the top. Had White spread out more early on he would have been a lot better positioned to win the game.  I will say that you did a great job taking the corners on the top, and you show some good fighting skill. Focus on the opening moves, building a better position to start from, and you will get much stronger.  Thanks again for submitting this game for review, I hope my comments are helpful to you.
Jay: This move has problem.
This looks like my first questionable move...  now that I look at it again, something like k4 seems better  Jay: This move is ok. It helps the fighting in the middle. And it has big profit.
This seems like it may have been bad?  I thought it was ok to strengthen black at a point where he is a bit weak, but it gives me some shape.  Would n11 directly been better?  Jay: This move does strengthen B's position. On the other hand, n11 is too passive.
Is this ok, or can I jump out further?  Jay: Direct jump is better.
I wanted some support for my running group, but since it's pretty much out, maybe I should have gone to r4 or r3, so that I could get the corner, and any influence he gains for the outside would be negated by the running group?  Jay: R3 or R4 would be good.
Not sure if o7 is good enough... seems too passive.
I'm pretty sure I should have saved this for later, if to play it at all...  now look like useless move (along with q9) that only strengthened black.  Jay: The game move does give you one eye in sebte so there is some value to this move.
Is contact ok?  Is there something better?  Jay: Seems ok.
Is this good?  Or is variation better?  Jay: I think that you need to fight for life here. So, A is preferred. Normally, B would be preferred.
Is this ideal?  Jay: This is good.
Jay: This sequence is not good for B. The center group is weakened and almost dead, while W's P6 group is secured.
necessary?  seemed like I needed this for life.  Jay: W is alive already. This is gote move.
Jay: W gave back some ground.
Jay: This move is big but not urgent.
This looks like a bad move... heavy and hardly gains anything.  Jay: This keeps more eye space for the center group.
didn't read too well, missed something...  l12 seems like it would have been better move?
Jay: A small lose, but big enough to hurt.
Rest is endgame and reading.  I'd appreciate any comments on that :)  Jay: Your endgame is better than your opponent. In fact, B is winning at this point. But, lost the game in the end. This move, for example is 8 pts in gote. D18 area is bigger and sente. E18 is reversed sente, also is fixs the problem at D16. See my next comment. Overall, this is a fighting game from start.
Jay: Not needed. A wast of move.
responding this way is my usual habbit  I think that's fine
this seemed slow to me so I was keen to take advantage
I figured this was better than extending 017
M 15 is bad. R17 is now perfect
I thought this to connect 0 17, but in hindsight it is not so good as I can see that there is no conenction
the black left was stoarting to look intolerable to me, so I played here to reduce it while leaving myself enough room to try and get out  I's very hard to find a good spot for white to play in here. You shouldn't have allowed Q13 in the first place. I'd probably play O3 instead of R9
now you can see that R9 was badly placed
I thought that group was safe, turns out later it was nto as safe as I thought it was.  It's OK to move on, but you gotta watch out.M3 doesn't seem good. O3 better, I think, or Q3 or R3.
I choose this direction because I felt getting more at teh top wsa better
black gains tons of territory now
this is unidimensional move, slow, since black stones are now solid
good move. Might be better than F3 that I thought of earlier.
Magnusjen [12k]: np
after this the game is quite hopeless for white. J4, P10 and C7 groups are unsettled, and all black groups are solid, and black has more territory.
overplay that black nicely exploited
I was becoming aware of being boxed in so I decided to try an dmake the most of the middle  I tend to start this kind of moves when I get desparate. But they have no benefit for white. You are not in a state to get the middle unless you are solid all around.
I felt that I coudl ignore thsi move
this and the following black moves are bad
why this?
an unnecessary move
nice
trying to stop black from reducing or destroying, was this the right time or too late?  this is OK
small move
why? All groups are alive. All these moves are very small.
better
I figured this woudl remove more of blacks point than what I would gain by defending at e18
now I decided it was worth less :p  correct
this hurt and I think I responded to it  badly mayeb it was better to let black caputure e 1 and I played here while black did that?
.
I think this sequence to save the group cost me the game  I don't think so. You couldn't make it much better.
I think I shoud have played here sooner if I got m11 woudl that have lead to a bigger reduction?  But you got lots of area around K14. I think that was OK.
??
I wanted to settle quickly so I could try to move on to big points, so I chose R3  Yes its a  good move to settle
this is a bit passive i think since it is still the beggining and you  have no reason to avoid the second variation of the normal  joseki   shown before
This was a misclick actually, I meant to play F17.  I considered making shimari with C4, but I didn't want to allow black to get a start on solidifying a framework on the top side  F17 is good  , shimari also good , cant say what is better.
I felt I had to do something to forestall the damage from a black J17 and subsequent development from Q16  Maybe an extension to K17 would be a better way to protect?  Yes K17  is  a  lot  better than this one  since the  D18  and G17 stone can come  under attack now
I was taken aback by this move.  O18 seems overconcentrated and slow, and Q15 might end up giving me outside influence which I'm not sure now to use.   this move and the mve black  played before this   looks  kind of bad actually since they both give you th  chance to  defend the weakness of  D18 and G17 stones
I have a feeling this is a bad move, but I wasn't sure what else to do.  I felt that I could rescue the O17 group without much trouble if they were under attack.  Maybe I'm fooling myself about this  This is a bad move since it creates   alot of weak groups for white,  all the marked stones luck  space for eyes still
Of course balck did well to not let you connect
I seemed to stop him from getting the right side.  he did enter the center though.  Yes , if black played somewhere there first  it would be disastrous for white
A move like D6 or D5 seemed slow and just giving up the lower side  Yes this looks interesting , it will provoke a fight
I hoped to slide to O2 later and steal the black group's base  Although  the  corner stone at c4 will suffer if black plays there first this is an interesting choise here since it attacks  blacks group.
Now you need either  continiu attacking  blacks  marked  group or defend c4
N2 didn't seem severe enough to make me respond when so much is about to be solidified on the right side.  By now I feel that I have too many precarious unconnected groups on the board, but how else to break up black's advantageous starting position?  I hate moyo games, so...
I liked the idea of scooping out black's base for my own safety.  yes this is a good move as  far as it conserns the  top leftt part of the table
I think you'll hit me with the bamboo stick for not making correct shape at D12.  It seemed to give better access to the center, but maybe I'm fooling myself.
this is what I love about the 3-4 point.. it's so hard to complete neutralize it  Still this isnt a  good move, i see you later  made life in the corner  but still the proper would be  b3 instead of this
now white has a group under severe attack
felt the need to make a sure eye right away  yes    since black left you the chace  it was right to take it right away
this is the price of having too many groups to take care of....  Yes in this possition black is way better he has both more thickness and safe territory
r18 cut still a threat
w can make 2 eyes for sure..
yet another white group to care for.
bad move!.  white should connect at E14.  I let him become strong.
foolish. this is not a tenable connect and I know it.
in retrospect this is not a very good safety move for whilte.  I needed to move toward connection with K2 group.  This move isnt  good since it  adds another stone with no base   for white  and  black can  launch an attack at the   c13  group .   and also can just conect at g4 and  threat to kill  2 groups  (g4  looks the safest and better for black)
c13 group still needs attention
I should have ignored and made another move to make safe above. yes   but then black would make  the other group suffer (see the variation)
now I realize that R18 was a big sente move.  Should have played it as it would have forced black to connect and make safe, while I took his corner in return.   R18 isnt sente
ignored my danger too long....
trying to ruin center territory for black
oof!
terrible, terrible greedy move.  forced white to solidify against me below.  Of course he was aiming to cut at J17.
desperate move to try to make 2 eyes here.  I don't even think it's possible.
humbleCow [5k]: oh bloody hell humbleCow [5k]: time tesuji newsman [5k]: too bad humbleCow [5k]: thank you newsman [5k]: it was fun game
Max- This seems rather an odd move to me. A is the first move that occurs to me (see continuation), but I think calm moves B and C are playable.  If you must attack on this side, I think it's best to do so with D on the third line.
Is Q11 needed or should I go to white corners ?  Max- If white played here after you go to the corners she's still a bit cramped and the triangle marked stone would still have some aji. But I think you can be more aggressive and play the sequence; black A, white B, black C, white D, and then black cuts w. E. The sequence gets  complicated and you have to be careful, but I think it works well for black. Iv'e gone over some of the sequences. At the very least I would suggest playing A first before going to the corners.
Max- This seems slow to me. Many bigger moves to play. On the plus side, the fact that the d14 stone is high leaves you some aji.
Max- I'd play A or B. Being on the fourth line leaves white the option of undercutting your territory after she pulls her stones out.
Max- This stone seems too close.
Max- Mistake on white's part that strengthen's black.
Is it better to pincer with M3 or M4, to let white invade right side, which I think is the idea of the chinese fuseki ?  Max- I would play M3. I don't see white making an invasion on the right. Might be done, but doesn't seem advantageous even if successful.
Max- Black should double hane with A.
Obviously I am trying to attack white as it is still weak. Maybe It is better to invade left side d10 ?  Max- This attack doesn't gain you much and it strengthens white while leaving you with weaknesses. Yes, d10 or d12 would be better.
Max- k6 was unnecessary and slow. Invade or cut would be my call.
Max- Again slow.
Max- you needn't answer every move of white's.
Maybe d10 is more urgent there ?  Max-Or d12.
k17 was more obvious, i suppose this peep is not good ?  Max- Or you could invade. So white captures a stone. Big deal.
Max-Follow through on your threat. Cut!
Max-:You left some cutting points. See what happens if white cuts.
Max- Another cutting opportunity. I think A is best but B is not bad either.
Max- Now atari at A.
Max- I don't think white needed to answer. You should keep running with A.
I am not sure i made the best out of this invasion ?  Max- No. But you got a serious reduction in. You have weakened your e17 stones, but not sure how you could have avoided that at this late stage.
Max. You have no eye space to speak of. Just run.
This move seems to little, no ? Though I still don't see bigger moves...  Max- Well there's the cut at A, that's huge. Then if you miss that there's B, C or D. I think even E is bigger.
Max- You have just eliminated the possibility of cutting at A.
Max- Forcing move at A first.
this one seems really unnecessary  Max- It is. You should cut off white's stone with A, making that a wasted move.
Clearly by this white move I realize black  h18 or d18 were big
Max- This is too early. Bigger moves to play.
now the biggest question to me : o17 seems necessary, white at o17 is too dangerous. So was it possible to play e2 instead, hope to finish in sente and o17 later ? I think it could change the issue.  Max- As long as you read carefully, o17 can be left.
this is a mistake, i think b10 better. I was wrongly focussed on m8 but there was nothing i could capture there...  Max- Yes, this was a wasted move.
Max- I think it's worth one more point to play at A.
dakachi [8k]: hi dakachi [8k]: gg
Altos [7k]: gg
I'm not very familiar with this joseki, and nowadays playing on the forth line worries me about invasions more mainly because my reading ability isn't in top condition.
A: Black does follow the joseki; This leaves the Black group floating.
I kind of feel that this isn't a good move. Any suggestions?  A: You are right, S5 is better shape, and elimianate the S6 empty triangle.
A: J3 is still weak - I would play J5 here; This also leaves aji for N3 later
A: Approaching from F17 is better, since it has miai of connecting to L16 and invading the 3-3 point. Now black creates another weak group, while O16 is still floating.
A: D14 is a must; Otherwise White build s a strong attack (as he actually did)
A: This is the vital point
A: My feeling is that White should have attacked by C11 - another vital point. The corner is strong enough already.
Now.. this part. I hate running with no eyes. in my first days of returning to the GO world, I would try to kill my opponent too hard and end up dying :( I practically died here as well.  A: C11 let white tun away, and by the way continue tha attack. I read the situation as follows: both C14 and D4 black groups are not settled, so trying to connect them will settle them. So I would play here D10. White C10 will probably live small, but black will build center thickness so he can attend to O16 and attacking F3.
Was this move OK? Or should I have played more locally instead of playing elsewhere? What's the term.... I can't remember.hehe  A: (Playing elsewhere is called tenuki). Anyway, reading the overall board tells me that you must play from the other direction, i.e. H12 or something similar. The reason - Both black groups (E14 and O16 are not settled, while white H10 is also weak. Whoever is going to take the initiative here will gain.
A: Never push if you do not intend to cut! This reduces your own liberties; You might also want to approach from the other side later, and now you eliminate this option.
A: Look at O9-N9: Did you gain anything, apart from strengthening M10?
A: The simplest and safest now is H13
A: MUST plan H13... Black cannot push with H11 becasue of G11 (Try it).
A: Why not capture?
Is this a mistake for my opponent? When I read it out, his 2 stones could have lived.  A: Yes, Black could have save his stones with K17 a few plays ago; but this way the G12 group is floating and white needs to attend to it urgently...
A: G12 situation is getting worse...
A: Black could have attacked G12 already
A: This a common mistake - you save a few points and lose sente. You should take another big point to gain more, and if black capture you gain sente again. By the way - check that black cannot capture white even if he invades.
A: Sever attack
I probably should have played at F13 right? Fortunately, my opponent made a mistake too.
Up to here, I think my group is dead. Or is there some other way?
A: Severe mistake of course
After here, my opponent seems to have lost concentration.
A: End of comments - white leads by far.
P: seems early for black to play this (erases aji) pet: you're right, too early;
P: I was not sure of the best response, my main intention was to separate the 2 black stones pet:  good idea, but this will also cost you something (at least hard fighting), since b was playing here first. see  vars move 30
pet: good move!
pet: so far all forced moves
pet:  this is called: 'pushing from behind' and should be avoided, since opponent is allways 1 move ahead. In this case you erase also aji at o3 and help b to connect the whole bottom.  But then how to help the r4- group: See variations
pet: this is not the right shape, see var
pet: after all w is a bit slow, so b gets the opportunity to settle himself. Perhaps this makes you fear b's growing territory. The result here is better for b here.
slow, but correct now
P: black plays a very defensive play but also gets territory pet: this move is in fact too defensiv; if b would play here (what seems to be not really necessary), he would play A (which makes good shape)  Good moves for b would be elsewhere (B,C,D)
pet:  locally the right point, but...  this extension plays from the strong group (above) to make territory, which is usually bad. [Both groups getting stronger, in this case it helps the weaker group more] proverb says: Don't make territory from a strong group (or wall)
P: I want to continue to separate black.  pet: I can understand the idea, but the r6-group would'nt die anyway, and m6 is no forcing move for the bottom group, so this is very slow.  So locally you can get a bit profit by playing A (see var) In fact w would save this for later
pet: now b got the big point
pet: j16 looks unusual, but fine to me, b is ahead now; still i would more feel like playing f15
pet: this is again a slow move, as  you know it is gote or leaves open the corner (c17), and let play b F16 is called a 'thank you move'
P: At this point, it seems very even in terms of probable territories. pet: In a decent look you will find that b can play A to D, while w has allmost nothing then E, which is not killing, but might be sente. So in conclusion i would say, even if w gets E and can play first to defend A, B or D (C is gote for black and should not be defended first) w is still behind, while b has allready quite a lot of territory.  Perhaps that's why you gave this game into review. The reason of this is clearly too many slow white moves!
P: Black has a weak group, but I am not sure how take advantage pet: this is a difficult task, so your felling is right
P: border of two moyos... pet: good move, but if b plays c17, would'nt help too much
pet: bad move
P: I hesitated a long time and finally decided to play this proper move for good shape in the corner. pet: :-)) good shape, but not nesseary (too slow), see vars ...
pet: good move since c14 stones are 'very' dead, b has lost a lot of his advantage, game is now open again
P: I am still unsure where to play but erasing the middle while pressuring a little bit the black group on the right seemed to be the best option, I will need to be patient to attack.  pet: again right feeling, your move walks into neutral area. [b can play Q14 when he likes]  A would still be the proper move, but now it would hurt b even more since both groups on the sides are not 100% alive.  alternative B and C would do it, but might be a bit 'high leveled'; see vars  D is bad (at the moment, far to slow)
pet: still A is the point
pet:  bad move, erases a lot of aji; b's answers A or B are correct (and kind of sente)
P: I did not really know how I could strike at black so I felt it was time to take some bigger endgame points.  pet: since b is alive now, allright
pet: here b gives another some points (too slow, no threat)
P: this move obviously caught me by surprise, good play by black.
pet: too easy for black.  give A a try (this might be hard work extremly difficult, but not hopeless) easy is B  see vars
pet: again very slow, s11 is big but gote!
pet: slow again, should be A, see var
pet: A! see var
P: this was painful, but I don't think I had a choice. pet: you had (last move)
P: not much of an attack from white, I just could not seem to really cause problems to black.
P: this game does not have much fighting, it seems to be mostly about walling-off territory or erasing territorial influence.  This style of play is difficult for me!
pet: gote! better sente moves like A -F  or reverse sente like G or (perhaps H)
P: This was a misclick on my part.   I wanted to play at G13. But no undo so it could have been the losing move for white I think.  The game is very tight I could not afford stupid mistakes like this!
P: Another painful sequence white is behind now.
pet:  better Q10, see var
pet: A might win the game, see var
P: I manage to get some points back yes, well done
P: I missed S10! Could have been over! pet: ... happens
P: The game is tight and yet I play this strange move, I was thinking of aji, but I should have first taken G16 for example. pet: yes
P: The losing move, K18 is the move black should have played, this ko will be painful for black.  Even if I can not win the ko, I expect compensation elsewhere to be enough to win the game. White has many more ko threats since black did play a bit thin in some shapes...  In the end white wins because of this ko.  pet: so one can say lucky win.  frist of all: your feeling of having trouble playing against an opponent making a lot of territory is right;  second: but this is because of the amount of slow moves, not because of the style of your opponent. b was just a bit defensive and makes very safe moves  (which are sometimes also slow) and of this you can't take advantage, cause b waits for any slow w move and got some  points extra, more then once.  so i think you improve (not only a bit) if you get a clear jugement about the following:  1) urgent move (not difficult, you urgent move i think) 2) double sente move (moves which are for both players sente) 3) sente moves (opponent has to answer) 4) reverse sente (prevent opponents sente) 5) gote (bigger moves first, you can only play one gote move, then oppontent play all his sente moves)  perhaps it helps, when you guess which kind of move you are playing and compare your guessing with your opponents answer  I hope the review was proper, if you have any further questions let me know (KGS: pet), you can leave a message.  END OF COMMENTS
hi, i already added some comment here, hope you can correct my comment if it is wrong and show me my mistake in this game.  thanks  You have done very good job , i just have some comment on variation and answer your question
i think this is mistake,  This is not jeseki
of course white should peep at 'a' first   Yes
this look very slow, maybe i should play at 'a' or 'b'  Yes , don't move for alive group in the beginning
this definitely very wrong,i consider move like a to f  D is biggest
maybe 'a' better than this  this is better  white wall in now useless
can i tenuki here?  i don't know but there is so much weakness in black shape
from here maybe i shouldnt defend my corner group, since it look like still safe even without some corner. but i m not sure, can you please check it for me?
this move look smaller than 'a'  yes
* Problem of this move is that one of the 2 stones will be captured by Black. Better is to either live in the corner (A) or get out (B).
If you want to play 3-3 omit this move. You have a few different scenarios then.
Eranorn : Here is the move I didn't know how to deal with.
Eranorn : Hmmm... Bad isn't it ? Did I lose a move in here, or was it just wrong ?  I think N4 was the move that was wrong. This move is not too bad since it gives you a change to slide to A or even do a pincher at B. You also have a group in the area where black thought his influence would be.
Eranorn : Of course...
I do not like this move. The left side is the part of the board where you should make your points, this is a move on the 3rd line and makes it difficult to make a moyo. This move does not force black to answer and white can play first around C14.
Black should play at A.
Eranorn : I think it is too small too, right ?  Yes, move is not urgent, leave it as is and Play A or B.
Too passive, you are following, better to play A.
Eranorn : Not a good idea... I just strengen his stones  No I think you can cut of the white stone, black played the stone one too far.
This move should be at A
Better omit this move and play A directly.
Eranorn : Necessary ? Or to small too ?  This move is the resukt of playing at A b and C. However with this move it is possilbe now to play around D and attack the black stone at D.
Eranorn : Here is really a big point, isn't it ?
Good.
Better to get out by A or B.
Eranorn : Hmmm... But couldn't pincer around L17...  White is alive with this group, this move does not do much. If you want to invade A, or B might be an option.  At this point you should also count, because this will influence how far to go into blacks moyo.  Black: Left: 6  bottom: 30 right corner: 9 Top: 20 65 points White:  top right: 10 top left: 4 right/centre: 10 left: 20 44 points.  So you'r about 15 points ahead and then 56 is too slow.
Should be at A. This puts more pressure on the white group and J18 is no monger possible.
This move is not good, you should try to get a living group as soon as possible. A, B or C are better.
Eranorn : Probably useless :)
Eranorn : I wanna try this.  It worked out quite well. Even M10 is now perfectly placed.
Eranorn : Another odd move.  A, B, C or D are better. D probably best, is worth at least 10 points.
You are following black again,  Q18 is bigger. Also because the right side is open and black will never be able to get many points here.
This is also why playing yourself Q18 was better, black played on both ends of your group and got both of the bigger points as well.
Big, after this move black is well ahead.  Black app. 65 points, white 45 points (without the komi).
This move seems a bit slow and A will come under a severe attack
Too slow as well, Black should play at A, keeps more pressure on the white stones and white will not be able to capture B.
A is better. will prevent the cut and keep white seperated.
This was sente for you (if black does not answer, white A and the corner is almost dead). So black should never have got the oppertunity to play here.
Black is avoinding compications and white is slowly closing the gap.
This move is not needed, Better is A.
Mistake of black,  cost him a few points.
If you want to play here better at A (at least one point better). But B and C are bigger. Best is C.
This move cost you one point.
Better at A, one point better.  No comments beyond this point.
git [3k]: yes, here git [3k]: yes git [3k]: is this move good? bugtaker [2d]: difficult... bugtaker [2d]: early git [3k]: if you were b? git [3k]: i will remember O4, thanks
git [3k]: i was sure i woud get something out of this :) bugtaker [2d]: if put Q8... want to attack  git [3k]: yes
bugtaker [2d]: P3 group is bad
git [3k]: at this stage i was happy
git [3k]: i considered that bugtaker [2d]: H16 is big
git [3k]: so pushing better for b...
git [3k]: i was happy with this, isnt it ok for b? git [3k]: w looks vry crowded bugtaker [2d]: I am not good at English.  git [3k]: w played many stones, got small territory and b escapes, so ok for b? bugtaker [2d]: y git [3k]: pls continue bugtaker [2d]: w M6 group is -> strong bugtaker [2d]: b N9 group is -> weak
git [3k]: afraid of b B10 :) git [3k]: sorry, b D10 bugtaker [2d]: J15 is small git [3k]: yes... bugtaker [2d]: M13 b group is strong and J 18 w group is strong git [3k]: maybe this was the key turning point in the game bugtaker [2d]: y
git [3k]: maybe, after w B13, b C8?
git [3k]: yes, J15 too timid
bugtaker [2d]: ^^
git [3k]: at this point, b still ahead?
bugtaker [2d]: F 14 is no good
git [3k]: F14 no good? bugtaker [2d]: yes git [3k]: please show me bugtaker [2d]: w J7 is too big
git [3k]: you dont like M4? git [3k]: yes, but since you had sente, it means i was already behind when i played M4 bugtaker [2d]: if b put M4 is big bugtaker [2d]: but w put M4 is small
git [3k]: all these moves seem natural, i was surprised to lose by 14 points
bugtaker [2d]: M4 is
bugtaker [2d]: ah bugtaker [2d]: attack is... git [3k]: can you show me your weak spots in the eraly game? git [3k]: early bugtaker [2d]: next game? git [3k]: my reason for R12, for example, was to try and attack w git [3k]: or play another game?
git [3k]: maybe i need to attack w more, but you made it hard for me to find an attack
[DP I figured this was the stronger stone (given Q6 below), so attached to it and played the standard joseki (I think!) to 14]
A: this is sente, but might be aji-keshi, its possible to leave this move for later
A: this is gote. If you want to play locally, A is a common move to immobilize the white stone.
[DP I wanted to play in this area to use the wall at P16 to pincer, but wasn't sure where the best move was]  A: a pincer is definitely best here, and a severe pincer like h17 is ok because youre stong all around.
[DP I have a suspicion I got this completely wrong and should have played at D17 instead, in which case the close pincer at H17 probably wasn't correct?  The conflicting thought in my 5k brain was building a wall facing D10 as per san-ren-sei strategy]  A: blocking at c16 is correct
[DP A good move by W?]  A: not really, its definitely not the biggest open space. The lower side is bigger. But now r17 would look better at o17.
[DP This was intended primarily to keep W separated, and also to defend the weak spots in the B position]
[DP Trying to follow strategy of giving W one big territory on the RHS which I could try to reduce]  A: white has no territory yet, the right side still needs a move.
[DP Perhaps better to use close pincer here to balance high stones at O4?]  A: k3 looks good shape to me but any pincer is ok
[DP Wasn't sure how to handle this double kakari.  Couldn't decide which was stronger stone, given thickness above, but pincer closer below]
[DP Now that I am adding comments to this game, this move looks really odd! Presumably C9 or C11 better, but which, and what are the standard sequences which follow?]  A: this is definitely odd, see variaton
[DP Wrong direction?  More profit to be had attacking W with C6 I suspect]  A: c6 is essential to take whites base! actually its the same wrong shape as in the upper right.
[DP C6 better? I am having trouble working out why I didn't play it... the blindness of playing the game I guess]  A: definitely c6, more severe
[DP Looks like an overplay in retrospect.  G11 better?]  A: H9 is a very good move. White is in trouble here. The follow-ups were the problem
A: A play at A instead would drive w into blacks marked strong stones in the upper left and prepare either an invasion at B or a moyo-creating move at C. See Variations.
A: this move doesnt profit enough as long as w can still play o17. Id still prefer building the lower center with a move at A or B, this also keeps the pressure on the white group. .
[DP Could you advise on the timing of the next set of moves? I wanted to make my outside groups stronger with the idea of keeping pressure on H10 group and also W stones at the top]  A: The question comes one move too late ;)   as for h3, the shape move is h2.
A: If you had played j12 on the other side, protecting this cut wouldnt be necessary
A: slow
[DP This felt correct as it also helped defend the weak belly of my O4 stones?]  A: necessary, and sente, so no question about this
[DP Again I felt this had achieved something by extending the wall and so building pressure on the 2 weak W groups]
[DP This seems to just allow W to make shape and stabilise his top stones.  How should I have continued the attack?]
[DP W now has sabaki, no? and I helped him get it :-( ]
[DP Aiming at least to keep W separate]
[DP This is slack I guess, allowing W to defend his other group.  He doesn't appear to need a second invitation!]  A: a move around m9 would both protect the black group and attack white severely. Upper side white doesnt look completely alive yet. M16 and L18 could stir up something.
[DP A classic mistake of following W around the board? Tenuki to attack central stones better?]
[DP Shows up my misstake of not playing C6 earlier myself]
[DP Was worried about W push-through at F16, although suspect I should not have been]
[DP Is there a way to continue the pressure? W seems to make 2 eyes rather easily now]
[DP This is a bad move now that W is alive, no?]
[DP Are these the biggest moves remaining?]
[DP Is there any hope left for B?  It all seemed to be yose from now on in, where B is always going to suffer playing H4 against W! This move I thought could connect either side, but I missed the threat of J19 connecting to F18. Was there a way to attack anything to give me a chance in this game?]
[DP W has made me pay dearly for my earlier mistakes here, and I screw up yet again!]
[DP At least I spotted W mistake here and reduced deficit slightly - realistically I was already nearly 20 points behind. This gave me 10 points back?]
hello!  Thankyou for taking the time to review this game, My rating has fallen by two stones so something bad must have crept into my playing somewhere, hoping to find it soon :p  I was black in this game, at the end I felt I lost more points than what I shoud have done, it was not often I had sente and did not mange to keep it when I did.  Scott,  > Hi, I hope my review will help you. The beginings of my comments are markes with the sign ">"  DISCLAIMER I don't know how to play go. I also studing it. My fuseki is suck, my end game isn't good, so all the comments should be treated only as my thoughts about the game
> I would never play like this. And I didn't find any examples that this kind of move is played by a stron player (ama or pro) It's hard to say for me why. R4 and R10 seems low if consider them together, I don't know.  Usually one approaches the lower side.   You could ask a question about this in sensei's forum.
> Tenuki usually is not recomended here
here I was thinkig maybe q5 or q6 would be better, but I played this thinking white would have to respond  >Strange move. You don't get a base with it and you give the base for the white with the next move at A  Tenuki is possible but instead of q5 or q6 I would play p3
>HUGE mistake I give the whole corner to white
> I would prefer to approach from the other side
> You are producing too many weak groups
>It's hard to find a good move for black
> You were lucky
>Bad move
>Another useless move
>Thank you move
> Another one You just giving him a territory
> A little bit dangerous move, but beacause of  q7 group could be ok
I knew i could not keep it all, this was my attempt at damage limitation  > Again not very good move beacuse of g16 allows white to reduce yor territory
> too late  very dangerous because of  g2
> w allows you to live
>Mistake
> You didn't try to catch him
> Useless move
> do nothing
> Again
i thought this was bigger than playing l5
I did no think h18 was necessary but I have been tripped up this way before so I played safe  > -1 point If you want gote safety you could play j15
This move came as a shock to me
I took some time to respond to this move, since I felt white could kill something ig it was ignored
BlackPlayer [?]: hi WhitePlayer BlackPlayer [?]: I am new to Go, this is my first game.  I hope you don't mind. WhitePlayer [20k]: no problem WhitePlayer [20k]: go on WhitePlayer [20k]: :) BlackPlayer [?]: I see we are playing a timed game...  Here white is trying to make a basic framework in which he will actually create territory later, this framwork is most easily made in the corners, but you already have all 4 of them guarded, so he's using his next best option, the sides. The center is not good for territory, because you have to create all 4 of the walls for your space, and it takes so many moves to do so that often your points there will not compensate enough for the number of turns you'd have to spend to create that territory.
With my previous statement in mind, keeping white out of the center isn't really the goal here, it would be to preven him from spreading on the sides. I'll be using the triangle to mark other moves that would have been good for you.
White is being rather aggressive
white's right side is weak due to how far from the edge he is, this move exposes that weakness and allows you to creep under him and mess up his framework
WhitePlayer [20k]: usually its enough time  White left this opening, he's playing too aggressively
Good move, you've begun to build your own base, which is the main point in the beginning of the game
Not bad, this also works
Here the marked stone is about to be captured. Instead of simply letting it die, it is best to at least use it as a sacrifice to gain momentum. See my variation as to my point.
The variation I mentioned earlier would be very helpful here to seperate the white stone from the rest of the group.
This is fine
WhitePlayer [20k]: where are you from?
White's threatening to seperate and kill your group, this move would've helped to connect them and keep them alive
Marked stones are dead now
The marked area is very important right now. If white comes in here your points in the area will shrink rapidly, while if you create a wall you'll have the entire corner for your points.
BlackPlayer [?]: sorry I didn't see you asked a question BlackPlayer [?]: I am from Israel
BlackPlayer [?]: you?  That exchange wasn't horrible, white didn't come in too far and your framework on the sides is taking shape nicely.
WhitePlayer [20k]: poland
BlackPlayer [?]: sorry for going so slowly
WhitePlayer [20k]: its ok
All there went well
You could have gone ahead and played here, since it forces white's response, then come back and secured your stones.
Here would have been fine
BlackPlayer [?]: what happens when I run out of time?
WhitePlayer [20k]: you have 5 byo-yomi  Here forces white to secure and allows you more momentum, see my variation
WhitePlayer [20k]: it means that you have to move within 30 sec BlackPlayer [?]: thank you
Could have captured here and atari'd the marked stone at the same time.
Marked area is the last major place where you can still invade white's area
You have a large infiltration point available, see my variation to use it
This is a known weakness of the stone on the 4x4 point, it needs other supporting stones such as the places marked to properly secure it
Here would have been fine
He's not technically alive until he plays one of the points marked
He's alive, now it's just a matter of not letting him break out of the corner and further reduce your territory
WhitePlayer [20k]: is it really youres first go game? BlackPlayer [?]: yes BlackPlayer [?]: but I have been reading a lot BlackPlayer [?]: I played 9x9 against the computer a few times BlackPlayer [?]: but its not the same WhitePlayer [20k]: no it isnt BlackPlayer [?]: this is very exciting for me I appreciate your playing
WhitePlayer [20k]: for now it seems you are winning BlackPlayer [?]: I'm not sur e how you can tell, but I had a big head start wit h6 stones!
Invasion point is gone now
### I ignored this mainly as I am not farmiliar with it.  Should I have replied?   It's not unsual ignore, but you can respond... depends on your strategy.  You can respond far because it's a 2 points enclousure. R9 or Q9 can be used as respond.
There are some sequences to be played here. R2, R4 are variations that can be used... you can study then.
### I took a guess here responding.  Later o3 was an issue, is there a better response?  W got the corner to easily.
### I was realling thing about dividing white  w/ a move like j16 or j17  I feel like what I did was to slow   M17 was a nice move, because F17 is good and m17 give influence and territory for W... Black is in trouble.
Black is ok now but W get a nice wall.
### the group seemed weak so I extended from it  it was a nice move, you got territory.
### This move was not so important?  Play around e2 might have been huge  Was a move ok, for later. There are bigger points now like keeping attacking F5
### another slow move I think
### how to play here?  K13 ish seemed better then my response
### is this move the biggest move?  here is gote sente is always better then gote.
Aleexx [5k]: hey
Imagist: This move will strengthen white.  It is better to simply press at M16.
is this something i should not do? would c14 have been better? i wanted to create some pressure on n17  Imagist: You need to settle your group on the top right.  You can do this without taking a loss by pressing at M16.
Imagist: White creates a strong group between black's two weak groups.
Imagist: You can jump into the corner at C17 or pincer at C14.  This move is not severe enough, and black's group will be too narrow.
the following sequence is unfamiliar for me. normally things move an other style. but i dont see a mistake.  Imagist: Pressing against white's group is a good idea.
Imagist: This is not necessary; it will strengthen white.  Better to jump out to O12.
Imagist: Strengthening white again.
Imagist: Too slow.  Better to jump out to O12.
Imagist: This is a mistake: white can play H18.
Imagist: Too slow.  C12 is an active move that is both an attack on white, and has a good relationship with D3.
Imagist: This is a valuable move for black, but not for white.  G3 is a good move for white, so it is better for black to take H3.
Imagist: Too slow.  Black needs to extend farther to C12.
i saw the outcome of the last moves in the lower half as good for me  Imagist: Black lost the entire bottom side and didn't get enough value for his corner moves in exchange, so the bottom is a (slight) loss for black.
is this okay? i was aiming at creating some territory on the left side and gaining some influence to the center and pressing w down.  Imagist: You can do more by attaching at G4.
Imagist: Good, you can't afford to connect here.
I
Imagist: It would be better to play at K6, sacrificing the three stones for superior outside influence.
i think this was a mistake. breaking through at k5 would have been better. but i am not quite sure, because later the group around h8 is under pressure and with w j8 it would have been much harder  Imagist: This move is correct; black cannot allow white a ponnuki in the center.
Imagist: It is better to connect at M11.  This removes weakness from both of black's group.
Imagist: Black should not respond to this, but should play S9 for mutual damage.
alright this is a great mistake. i should have played f16 and it would only be 0,5 points later. is it right that the move is 7 points?
Imagist: You need to respond to this atari.
maybe s14? and start to play joseki in upper left corner?  I think go such moves too early.  should D4 instead
I like moves loke p13 It is begin of making the wall
panch:  q14 better for w  now b may to go "a"  should play joseki
look variant  if u plan alive  right way s17  if u plan run out - p14
panch:   b made good shape for w  better  not  play there!  the board have 4 corners  maybe
panch:  u make for w strong solid wall  bad  but there is a sente in o16.
maybe c16 better?
euGOchan [6k]: e18 next?  panch:  sure. I think so  this corner is big
euGOchan [6k]: should i have ignored the 3 stones and played somewhere else?   panch: w must  occupate e18
panch:  "b try to cut two big w groups"  good plan
panch:  k18 better  f10 much  better
panc:  e10  more solid
h14?
panch:  h18 for w
euGOchan [6k]: i think white shouldve played somehwere here instead of trying to kill htat small group. or is that upper left hand group worth more?   panch: u must safe left upper corner first
good w move
first go g16
w go out ko
right direction
panch:  another mistake   see variant
euGOchan [6k]: not too sure about the next few moves. i'm just trying to prevent white from invading my lower left hand side euGOchan [6k]: but trying to cut these stones off at the same time
panch:  if u plan to cut u have to cut  see variant
euGOchan [6k]: why was that neccesary, given that group is already dead?   panch:  it is mistake
:)
panch:  there is much more!
euGOchan [6k]: white couldve captured the 3 black stones... i dont konw why he played otherwise euGOchan [6k]: actually i felt i played better than white (except for the beginning when i tried to make that dumpling group live euGOchan [6k]: then why did i lose??
panch!  vitual point
panch:  resume  1, left upper corner was big 2, b group in center not can run out     und had to alive 3. w must to cut  position on right  side
euGOchan [6k]: here's another part i should have defendee euGOchan [6k]: defended
wodka88 [?]: u2
Kraeftchen [8k]: thanks ^^
wodka88 [?]: im new so be soft :P
Kraeftchen [8k]: when did you start playing go?
wodka88 [?]: i played a while ago 1 year maybe
T: I do not have a strong knowledge of joseki, so I consult with www.eidogo.com. This move is not listed as a joseki and should instead be played as Q4 or Q7.  W: Up to this point standard but here I think i butchered the joseki
T: This fight feels favorable for black. It feels like he can get some influences that will work well with his 4th line stones at the top.
Kraeftchen [8k]: well, since I'm doing pretty dumb mistakes you won't have any trouble here ^^
T: This is definitely a bad result for black and he has lost his opportunity to get the most out of this corner. I will try some variations to see what else might have happened.   W: Well nice result for White but do I still get a good result if Black dont do mistake?
T: B is attacking near an already shaky position, this cannot go well for him.
T: I recommend reviewing this joseki when you have time because it has many variations and is somewhat complicated. What you would like to avoid is having B make his right side stronger while also improving the position for these stones locally. Unfortunately, most of the variations at this point stem out to B reaching over to those right side stones.  With that knowledge, perhaps it would have been better to play a high pincer stone, instead.
T: Consulting eidogo.com again, this is not a correct move. B should play at H5.
W: Direction alright?
T: B has a strong position here now
T: Probably better to D10 immediately as you are not threatening to kill B with B2, and it is not large enough yet.
T: Hard to say if tenuki was right for this move. It would be a question of how dangerous the cut at G7 would be for black. At this time, I think black could handle that cut just fine, so maybe tenuki is fine as well.
T: You cannot expect to get the entire left side, so you should choose a portion to give to black. If the bottom left can live, I think that maybe a move such as C11 could be good here.
W: How to respond to this kind of invasion?
T: I think that maybe losing this corner is an acceptable loss for the large gain on the left side.  Where did I go wrong in losing the corner?
T: Black's territory is already open on this side, so possibly it is a better choice to invade the corner. Also should possibly begin thinking about finding a way to exploit black's weaknesses in the lower right area.  W: If I look back J13 is more important here
T: All good for W. Now black has to secure a large amount of points in the center to win.
W: Is there any chance Black could have escaped?
T: Now B is crushed and cannot win.
W: oops
T: It seems difficult to do because of the aji around P9 and S9.  W: MY attempt to kill the whole right side of Black
W: Black is alive. Missplayed?
T: Perhaps this connection is not required yet.
T: Bad for black. Maybe there are not a lot of threats left at this point, though.
Kraeftchen [8k]: misclick -_-
wodka88 [?]: xD
wodka88 [?]: nice try ^^
Kraeftchen [8k]: nah, I knew you wouldn't do the wrong move
Kraeftchen [8k]: but at least 2 stones
Kraeftchen [8k]: better than nothing
wodka88 [?]: i did a few in here
Kraeftchen [8k]: well, what should I say ^^
wodka88 [?]: can we scip the ko?
Kraeftchen [8k]: sure
blas [4k]: I choosed this instead of o5 because I thought it was not good to sacrifice k3, and o3 aim the corner  JS: The aim of the black invasion at m3 is not to capture or attack the k3 stone. In the fuseki stage it would be unreasonable to begin small scale fighting when there is still so big open territory left to play. So the basic aim of m3 for black is to sacrifice it to close the right corner in sente, so that black is the first one occupying the next big point. So look at the variations.  JS: The move k5 does not really threaten the left black group, but also does not really capture the m4 stone. Every move you make should not be serving only one purpose, but several purposes, e.g. a move that attacks the opponent and at the same time stabilises the own position. That is why o5 is the move most played by professionals in this position.
blas [4k]: I think I didnt play wrong but I dont like the actual situation. I dont know if my fault has been done now or later  JS: White now is in a very comfortable position because white more or less has a base at the bottom and the group also looks into the center erasing the influence of the black wall. However the black corner is still open for an invasion at the 3-3 point, so black has achieved nothing, just strengthening the white group.
blas [4k]: Maybe was better to enter in his moyo blas [4k]: or to play r13. My idea was to make territory and after reduce his moyo  JS: This move seems very good. Black builded up a moyo on the right, but it is open on two sides. White now can slide to A to reduce this moyo by a lot, or white can invade at the 3-3 point at B.
JS: Black sacrificed 3 stones for nothing, now white has clearly two eyes in is more than alive. But now White has a stone at A, which makes an invasion at B even more easy for white. You gained a minimum of 10 points (if not much more) just because black wasted his stones and made you clearly alive. You know groups which are 100% alive are the strongest base from which to attack, because you can be 100% sure, that they won't die. So white can continue very aggressively knowing she cannot lose.
blas [4k]: All this play was bad for him. I dont  why at last I loose  JS: You can look at one position from two ways: The first way is: All of my groups are very weak, I have to save them and give them live, or let them escape fast into the center. This would be the way the "prey" would look at situations. Or you look at it the other way around: My stones are strong and they are building a foundation from which to attack. This would be the fiew of the hunter looking at a position.  JS: So white invaded your framework at B and it is your turn. Now comes the question: Do you want to be the prey or the hunter?  JS: If you think of A as a weak stone, you will run out with your opponent. But you should not always let your opponent do what he wants, and use your stones. Look at the variation.
JS: Just looking at the situatino now, your opponent has group running into the center, and white has two groups which need help. The one in the corner would be very unhappy black gets the point at A. But at the same time a week white group is struggling for live at the outside. So the black group is attacking two targets at the same time.
blas [4k]: I try to make a base, to feel safe and after reduce the moyo  JS: The move at S10 is a very heavy move, which means that it tries to rescue the whole white group at every price. In Japanese this would mean "shinogi" It is very important to know when and what stones one can sacrifce.  JS:The right way to deal with weak stones is to make "sabaki", which means to always keep the option open to sacrifice them to get even more profit. Look at the variation.
JS: Now Black got everything he wanted.
blas [4k]: I dont know if this is the best now  JS: this move looks very necessary, otherwhise the white corner gets into deep trouble. This move also makes it possible for white to connect his stones under at A as an emergency meassure.
blas [4k]: I have the impression all this game that he's playing badly, but his situation is better than mine
blas [4k]: now his moyo is reduced, and i have only a weak group  JS: Yes, but you can already count -20 points because of the fact that you have one weak group and every group of the opponent is stable.  JS: However the position now seems a little bit favourable for white.
JS: Good move. This is a very big movem and also the last big fuseki point in this position, so white should have an advantage if the right group doesn't get into big troubles.
blas [4k]: now I have towo weak groups but I thought that  the influence of my stones of the left would help me, and f17 is weak too  JS: Yes this looks playable for white, but it can get complicated because of the fact that white has two weak groups then. So for an easier continuation look at the variation.  JS: This is my last comment. Just review this game after this invasion. There was very much fighting and your groups started to becomming weak and you had to go living. Being forced to have to life with a group that was first not really weak is not a thing one wants to desire. One last advice: Moves which strengthining the own weak groups are much bigger then they look like :-).
blas [4k]: he has mede a mistake here: I dont know well how should I have played before
blas [4k]: anyway he's still winning. I have to enter in his left moyo
blas [4k]: he has made a big error now and has loosed his moyo. Im winning now
blas [4k]: too greedy
blas [4k]: I wasnt thinking now. Big mistake
blas [4k]: I didnt realized of the atari
blas [4k]: all for nothing
blas [4k]: thx Polocaty [5k]: ty
unusual opening
Donal: In my opinion, black 5 is just inviting trouble. White can pinch at A, which works really well with his stone at 2. (See diagram.)  Better would be to play at Black B, which makes C and D miai.  Looking over this entire game, I think my main thought is "Play simpler moves!"
White 6 is not bad, but A is a better. If you play White 6, Black can play B, threatening  C and D.
Black 7 is in the wrong direction. Making a base in the corner is not a high priority, as Black is more concerned with making use of his star point at the right.
White 10 is good, as it erases Black's potential territory on the right.
In many cases, black 11 is considered to be the vital point for making eye space, but here there is no immediate need to play it. Black is losing the opportunity to play at A instead. Better to play at B, threatening C and D.
Black 13 is way too aggressive. It looks like he is powerfully attacking White 6, but after White jumps to A it is Black that is under attack.  Black will now probably have to jump to B. So before playing 13, Black should have realized that the exchange of A for B was inevitable. He would probably not have played at 13 if these moves were already there. Perhaps he would have played at C. So C would have been one reasonable alternative to 13.
seems like the right direction  Donal: White 16 further erases Black's framework on the right, and prevents a Black pincer at A, so it's a good move. Black's corner group doesn't have eyes yet. Now that White has defended, Black needs to defend somewhere also, such as B, C, or D.
Black probably wants to exchange 17 for white A, and then return to B. But there are problems with this. First, White may invade on the left, so Black is inviting needless trouble. Second, even if White answers at A, this exchange has further erased Black's framework on the right for no reason.
White doesn't really need to invade at 18, but it is a powerful way to play. I would probably play at A and try to win a slow-paced game. The invasion could easily turn against White if he makes the slightest mistake.
Since Black 25 was gote, White was able to play 28 and get a nice result. But White should realize that he was lucky to do this well because Black normally would have played a move like A instead of 25. (See diagram.)
Black 39 is in interesting move, but he could easily get into trouble because his stones on the left are not alive yet. Better to just make eyes by playing A.
White 44 might be good, but it's impossible for either player to read this out. Go is not a dice game! Play moves that you know will succeed.
White 46 works if Black plays at A instead of 47. (See diagram.)
When Black plays 51, White can't cut at A. Black will play B, threatening two different ladders.
White 52 defends against the ladders, but leaves his other group vulnerable. He needs to play a move that defends both groups at once. (See diagram.)
Instead of capturing, White could consider moves like A, B, or C, but the result would be similar.
Black could now just extend at A. But it's difficult to read it out because Black isn't alive in the corner.
i guess ko is the best result here?  Donal: Ko at A was possible. But it would have been better to ignore the atari of black 65 and escape to the right
Instead of 88, White needs to play A and try to kill this group.
White can still get ko. (See diagram.)
Black 99 need to be at A, to keep White from getting territory in the center.
Black is winning, and should just be trying to play simple moves that reduce White's territory in the center. No need to be complicated.
Nice move!
seems bad for w  White is behind in ths game, so trying something tricky is reasonable. The exchange of 12 for 13 leaves a cutting point at A and also weakens the white group to the left, so playing at A would have been better.  Looking at the game overall, White lost his stones on the upper left without compensation, so all Black needed to do was prevent White from getting a lot of territory in the center. He got into trouble somehow though.  End of Donal's comments.
bad result for w ,perhaps i was too agressive
wrond direction? after the game i saw the o16 move and i think it would be a better play
another fight i lost
zdli2002 [2d]: hi
Not usual, (but not forbidden). Usual chinise is at R11
normal
play the corner first
corners before side ...
this is useless. Therfe is no valu in J3 at this stage (10 / 12 points). White should either play B4, S4 or S17.
same, play the corners.
this is too easy on white. You should separate, or have white live under the stones to build central influence.
now white has separated you ...
fine with me
B8 works also
wow ! This is VERY bad. E3 should be at F5.
Ok, you miss an opportunity here : Go is about 'balance', and attacking.  Territory is a 'by product' that you build because you put your opponent off balance (or you kill his stones).  This is very important, becaus it should not be confused with aggressivity, or relentless attacking.  The situation here, is the fact that the lower white stones have a VERY bad shape, and NO EYE at this moment.  You should try to take advantage of this.
I'm not shure this is productive. If you want to invade such a territory, rather play at Q8
I have added something on the S13 variation.  S13 is THE ONLY MOVE, because it separates white groups.
no need.
small
R18 better, if you want to protect, because it will prevent the monkey jump.
ok
beware of the ko ... at O18 ! It can be very costly I would play safe at O18 ...
Ok, white played it soft ...
too small
no, the other way
oups ! White is giving you the leading 2 points here :-)
Here I wanted put my shimari into action, but I wonder whether D6 would not have been more appropriate.  crux: I'd probably prefer to play in the lower left corner.  You can choose a joseki where you can expect to end up in sente; then you can come back to this point on the right side.
My objective, here, is to build thickness and then invade around K3, in order to threaten both F3 and O3.  crux: You can't threaten O3. Strong groups make poor targets.  Another way of looking at it (and I honestly don't know if it is an important consideration here) are the motto "lean on strong stones to attack weak ones".  Here, the white stone on the lower side is stronger, because its reinforcements (around O3) are closer.  Therefore, it might make more sense for Black to try and attack the white stone on the left side, i.e. you'd want to play the other attachment at A.  Playing B is also possible; White will invade the 3-3 point and you can tenuki to make a good position at the top.
crux: This is terrible.  Black has no eye shape, no territory, and no easy way to kill the marked white stone.  If that stone were one line higher, your move would be a (handicap-ish) joseki.  Maybe this is what you thought of, but the situations are very very different.
This, I believe, was a mistake, resulting in white's reinforcement on the side.  crux: The cut is an important resource, but it usually becomes active only when White's two marked liberties are filled (and even then Black might prefer to play A as a threat.  Giving White the cutting stone as a gift is terrible.
crux: Misguided.  The white stones on the right are safe, Black's left corner group still has eye shape problems (imagine a white move at A), so all in all Black is a lot weaker on the lower side.  That's not the right moment to start an invasion: you've given yourself two weak groups vs at most one.  A better way to attack would be to play B, which has two purposes: strengthen your own group, and weaken White's two stones.  Only after your own group is stable does the move you played in the game start to make sense as an attack.
This move seemed big to me, as it is starting to confine white and build some moyo. However I wonder whether a play around F7, keeping white stone separated, would not have been better.  crux: The weakest stones on the board are the triangled black ones.  The game move helps them somewhat, but doesn't stop White from keeping them isolated.  You're adding stones to an already strong group, and the moyo is unlikely to be valuable when White has something simple like A to reduce it.  As for F7, it is meaningless as a way to separate White: the group on the left is alive, and White will be happy to take the opportunity to strengthen his other group by attacking the two weak black stones.  It can also live quite easily by sliding to B.  If you play a move to separate live groups, you've played on a dame point: worth 0 points.
crux: Attacks your stones and reduces your moyo at the same time.
crux: Doesn't help Black, only strengthens White, so it's an unnecessary move.  Something like A would be better as it affects the eye space of both groups.
I managed to cut the white group, but have my own group enclosed. I think this exchange is not that good for me, as White has room to live, and get good thickness on the left side as well.  crux: More importantly, Black's corner group is half-dead.  Subsequent events show that neither player is aware of this, but at this point White should start thinking about how to kill it.
Can I kill white?  crux: I don't see a way - variations attached.  The question is "can I avoid dying in the corner"?
crux: Probably not the best choice for White.  No followup seems immediately attractive, and Black can build up his top side by attacking.
I didn't know how to attack R13, so I switched to F15, which threatens to enter the white moyo.
crux: I'd leave this unplayed.  A white stone at A is helpful for White, as B becomes interesting.
This may look slow, but I thought that this way my groups would avoid being cut and attacked, and that White having two weak groups (A and B) would be enough for me to win the game. I was actually very happy with the position :)  >From now on though (or maybe from even before?), black outplays/crushes me in all aspects of the game.  crux: Connecting is absolutely the right thing to do.  However, even connected, the group has no obvious eye yet.  It's too big to die, and White's surrounding groups are too weak to attack, but it's something to keep in mind.
Trying to build thickness in order to attack the right group. I think the hane at L16 was better.  crux: I like this move.  This is a case where separating first seems like a good plan.
crux: This move I'm not so sure about; it lacks a clearly defined threat in my eyes.
crux: Don't play this, it's better for Black if White doesn't get two definite eyes.
This was a very vad move; I misread the top and felt angry about it :)
crux: Doesn't appear to be a very large endgame move.  Defending the cut at A, for example, might be bigger.
Here I think I should have extracted P10; I thought I'd exchange territory in the center, but that didn't turn out good.
Hasty move.
crux: It seems like things went wrong for Black in this area.  White got territory out of nothing in the center, while Black's area on the lower side disappeared.
It is not my style to play this opening. I think you have to find a balance between high and low stones. Now all your stones are high ( on the fourth line ) this leaves a weaker place under your stones. I would recomend K3, or p16 or P17 to not give white a corner enclosure.  I put some sequences on the moves before ^^
a high stone again ^^, But its a hard choice now on how to invade/reduce whites top group. maybe F 17 instead...
Now white has invade your teritory. This is your chance to attack. You can use the P3 move to reduce his base and then extend, just remeber that the p3 move should only be used when you have a stone ( like K4 here ) reducing whites extention space. This is because after the sequence white still hace a nice R3 invasion.
hmm... I think that you have to be carefull here. When you have two long extensions from a D4 stone the C3 invasion looks big, white will probably try it. So if you attack black with the F17 stone and he plays along kindly, I think you end up having no great choice after the C3 invasion. But if you play C14 and all goes smoothly then you can make a bigger moyo, and your stones will be working better together.
nice timing ^^ it was an important move  If whit got to do a corner inclosure with R10 in place it would have been painfull
white can not connect at the top, I think the right direction here is a jump to the center, aiming at the weaknesses on the right side.
you have to be carefull, this is a weak shape. but you can use it to mislead your opponent in certain situations often requiring a sacrifise.
now I think it is very hard to save the two groups. It is a litle bit too much to ask. So now the question is which thickness do you want. Do you want to face the R10 stone or the L 17 group.
hmm... Maybe you could have tryed to sacrifice the stones at the top and  get thickness faciong the right side. Sacrificing  for compensation.
Those stones will be hard to save and wont give a lot of points. Now you should find bigger moves Maybe C 12 and folow up. or Q2 to pressure botom white group
good move. Finding a better move than just connecting is always good
fantastic ^^
very good
this is you chance to take sente. The X (Q2, C12 ) moves still look good, and should be played I think
T12 is not really needed. Try look for this kind of moves in your game and play sente instead.
I think Q2 is bigger here. You shouldnt always attack to kill, you have to attack to make teritorry.
Maybe C12 then k7 instead, Comparing two options during a game is always good. It helps you see eveything in a bigger way, and trains your reading ^^
nice cut ^^, but always think of what the chase is going to get you. If the chace does not give you anything, then the cut might not be a good idea.
white is complicating the fight.
Hmm... Maybe its too early
good move but now black also has to be carefull for the top group. It looks a lot weaker after the whole sequence.
looks like an overplay
this is taking a big risk. H19 is safer no ko ^^
nicely seen^^
here G10 is a litle better  ( detail ^^ )
good kill on the bottom left ^^  End of comments, See the end for conclusion.
I know this pincher is usually used when P3 is at P4, but I wanted to experiment with it.  dv: I don't think these details really matter at our level, but it is good if you know this and know why (I don't).
I wasn't sure how to respond to this.
dv To me this is the only move.
My thought with this was to take infulence on the bottom side, but afterwards fell I made white too strong  dv You should cut at A.
dv: The corner is too big for White.
dv: I'm convinced Black must continue the race to get ahead at A. The cutting points jeopardize the exchange of thickness for territory.
dv This is a mistake. See the var for the joseki.
dv White can resist.
dv: In comparison with the joseki, WHite gets the squared stone instead of the triangled stone: a big loss for Black.
dv This is a small move. White loses the option to cut later.
dv: B becomes stronger
dv: Both the marked positions are strong, so 47 is a small move. You must increase your central influence with A.  S1
I feel like this was a mistake in the tesuji, as it ends in gote, without being much stronger, unlike the variation.
dv You should not protect this stone. See var.
dv Wrong side.
dv Wrong side. See var.
dv GOod technique.
dv: I don't like the double approach, for you take the battle closer to White's strength. I prefer a simple jump at A, preparing a splitting attack on white's stones.  S2
I tried to separate the right group with this move, but feel that I strengthened white far too much.  dv If you want to separate, use A here.
dv You should fight where you are strong, not yield. See var.  S3
dv: reduce base wit A. You are strong in the centre.  S4
dv; Now White has settled all his groups, while having more territory. Save heavier mistakes, it is difficult now for him to lose.  End of comments.
Yes, I know. Lost my mind for a moment and was running out of time. I feel there isn't much way to save the game. I count black down by maybe 6 points on the board, but with two weak groups to white's none, and not much potential, that turns to a 20 point difference easily. My yose was probably not great either,  so if you have any comments on that, I would also appreciate it.
Okay yeah white six was really bad.. I forgot that I was on the 3 line, thought it was the four line since I am usually black and keep to the 4 line... since white 6 is horrible what would be better  *** Not necessarily very bad, but not common. Usually this is not good because it does not make the best use of the stone. Not enough pressure on black, and leaving aji for black around the corner.  Depends on how you want to play it. Either play a pincer or make contact and settle the corner quickly. If I were white I would play a pincer and hope to make use of the stone at d-3. ***
*** Not the best move by black. Black has no moyo so a simple move at m-3 would have been better; or, l-4. m-4 is too crowded (replicated and 'heavy'), and leaving weakness around k-3. White is semi-settled in the corner so black should want tro settle quickly.
How is the placing of 8, wanted to attack there but not sure where exactly  ***  Not bad, but the shape is not optimal. Consider k-3, k-4. The distance between j-3 and d-3 is not good, along with the shape. ***
This is what I wanted black to do  *** Definitely bad. ***
*** Not the best move. Definitely you should capitalize by playing at k-4. ***
I liked the way this turned out  *** Makes it too easy for black, the shape is not bad for black. Leaving weakness for black to hane at j-5. ***
Black 17 seemed to aggressive but wasn't sure how to capitalize on it.. thought maybe I would get to attacking it later  *** black 17 definitely bad. Need to be careful to not let the chance to attack it fade. ***
*** Not the best move. Bad, actually. View the variations. ***
*** Very bad result for white. ***
*** Redundant move, the black group on the right is settled and the white group is weak. SHould either make it bigger at q-10 or capture the territory on the left would be much better for black. It still looks better for black though. ***
Now I got to attack it  *** From my perspective this is very dangerous, but black does not know how to respond. I say this because white has 2 weak groups  (marked with triangles) near the combat area, and very likely a combat would lead to the death of either group. ***
*** Bad. ***
I like the looks of this  *** Serious mistakes by black. Deep trouble. Still, not a lost war because of the weak white group. ***
*** One mistake after another... ***
was this the right move?  *** Looks alright. I would play at h-14 though. ***
At this point I thought black could get out so I thought I should attack and try to get a cutting fight and take some stones and build up my position... don't like how it ended up, Is there anyway right now to strike harder?  *** The cut was not a good idea. Before attacking you should strengthen the weak groups first. Get out first should take priority, since after you get out (e.g. by h-12, you will still have sente wince black is missing a move.) ***
Now I figue he can definately get out so I shift my focus to the isolated group on the top of the board  *** That's why it's bad. You settled the shape too early, leaving no weakness to capitalise on later on. Need to learn about leaving 'aji'. Now the white groups are in danger. ***
*** the black 17 definitely shows its dumbness here. This is a bad move. Black should make some sacrifices to settle down and make up for the blunder of black 17. ***
I did these last set of moves so that I could attack at the triangle location because I thought I saw some possibility there but I knew it would be a hard fight and I am worried about the white group in the upper middle so I start to run away
*** That's why this variation is not preferable. Should have settled the group before attacking. ***
I don't think turning the corner at 56 was a good move but could I have done something better?  *** Definitely very bad. Check the variation. ***
Now I realize that I am in deep trouble now, I couldn't see a way to get the white stones in the upper middle out??? Is there any way?  I give up and decide not to play too much since it might change later on..so I go back and protect the white stones in upper right  *** Very bad for white. If black plays correctly, pretty much has won the game. Attacking the black group and try to kill it seems the only way, but doesn't look like white has enough liberties. ***
*** Inconceivable mistake. ***
*** The marked group is still in danger.  q-3 is bad. ***
*** Why did black skip a move? ***
Ouch didn't see that coming???
*** Bad. ***
yokokeko has resigned the game.  Black resigned but if feels like if I lost one of my big areas I could have lost, won by the skin of my teeth when a few more prudent plays might have put the game away much much earlier.  Thanks for any advice.    *** It can be concluded that black has made the game a mess. Black failed to see white's many obvious weaknesses.  White needs to learn to strengthen weak groups before attacking and actually see the weak groups. White's attacking actually turned the game in favor for black by creating many weak groups, while black failed to capitalize on the weaknesses.  Black might still have a slight chance with a good end game now. See variation.  /End of review ***
mehdi [6k]: good games
tatay [3k]: you too
--I think I played wrong in here this sequence..  G: This move looks OK, but I think you could also pincer right away, at A for example
G: Looks like a bad move to me. Don't attach a stone you want to attack. You attach when you want to make shape, settle. Here your group is quite strong because white just made a peep and you answered. You should attack with it, not defend. See variation.
G: up to here, the result is very bad for black (compare with the previous variation)
G: You don't need to be so scared. Attack the white stones instead (see var)
G: again, you attach to stones that you could attack instead. You are helping white.
G: too early because B group is very weak. Play around A first and see what happens.
G: I think I'd rather play at A, in order not to hurt the B group
G: Better at A in my opinion, since white pushes from behind. It would avoid white playing there (see what happens later in the game). The problem with B group is that even with this last move it's not completely safe
-- What can be played instead of this? Where is better, I couldn't find..  G: Well, did you ask yourself "what do I want to accomplish with this move?" I don't know what's the purpose of this move, so it's a bit hard to answer. Locally, A or B could work, A being the most solid. Also, in this position maybe you need to think about playing C right after you have played A for example. It connects yours stones solidly, and also threatens the E group and the D cut.
G: I would simply play at A here, then maybe get sente to play at B
G: You need to play A !
G: ouch !
-- I was wrong here!..  G: yes and a few moves before.. The ko at A is huge and white could choose to fill it now... (see var)
G: not need, white should play A, it works.
G: A better, in my opinion
-- Is there a way to kill kim?  G: No. in this position you should think about double hane, see variations
G: see variation
G: you need to play A to live, see variations
G: white is being nice
G: this move hurts the A group. But maybe you want to sacrifice it?
G: so, you don't want to sacrifice it. Then you shouldn't have hurt it before.
G: not sure about this move, you need to read carefully all variations before playing this. See exaple variations
G: A captures B and is therefore worth 21 points, not mentioning the aji around C. But you may decide that tenuki is more important. I do not know.
G: don't hesitate to put more pressure on white by playing at A, even if the extension from B seems unusual.
G: It's also possible to consider A, possibly threatening both white groups. Also you have a potential problem at B and C. I think I would play D to settle everything first. Oh and of course you can still play E whenever you'd like, for a nice profit.
G: ah, here goes the profit, now it's seki.
G: now that it's seki in the lower middle, I would play at A to settle things there. Then white should take car of his right side group
-- This is a bad move I think?  G: see variation for another possibility
G: not good shape, you can still be cut with white A then B, see variations it's an important point.
-- And this one, too? (last question of player of the game)  G: this one is ok, see variation in two moves
G: You absolutely need to play around A to get a strong splitting attack (see variation). This move you played is unimportant and ends up in a loss for you.
G: you're trying too hard. You need to fix the outside at A first. When you go for the kill you need to be sure of what you do. Absolutely sure. If you didn't read everything, then just go for outside moves that threaten the group.
G: given the state af A group, this will probably not work, and could end up in a loss (losing the A group) end of comentary
mehdi [6k]: thank you tatay [3k]: thx tatay [3k]: bad ko
>Maybe just K16 or Q10 or something like this instead?  Sirkut> This looks good and looks like a fairly common fuseki to me.
>Again.. R14 better?  Sirkut> No, I think you had the right idea, but your choice invites a pincer at J17.  I'd recommend K17 or J17 instead.  Just let white make a small weak base if he wants.  In exchange you'll have a larger stronger base and sente.  See variation.
Sirkut> It is much too early to start pushing into the center.  As you'll see later in the game, it's also not a good idea to leave the 3,3 point unprotected.  This is a complicated position to be in.  Look at the variations for a few suggestions.
>This one looks strange for me...  Sirkut> I agree. ;)  It's too early to invade IMO.  I think K3 or C10 would have been more appropriate.  C10 I like better because it has three strong corners to push against and is farthest away from other clusters of black, yet still close enough to have something to run to.
Sirkut> At this point there are much larger positions to worry about.  I've marked a few.  It is very tempting to take particular stone and run with it, but you have to fight that urge.  Instead, each move look for the biggest move - first look for biggest by amount of territory gained, then look for the positions that will get you the most influence.
Sirkut>  Ouch.
Sirkut> Double ouch! :)
Sirkut> White overextended.  See variation.
>Argh..
>This one was a pretty "random" move. No idea what to do here.
>Wrong direction? somthing like D12 better maybe?  Sirkut> I like this move better than D12 because when you're in the center you have to think about making circles around the territory you want.  J12 would be a natural next move.  However there are some better moves on the board.  B3 significantly hurts white and puts pressure on E3 and G3 while leaving a good follow-up move of B6.  In a variety of combinations the positions of N7, Q7 and R9 look like they could have a lot of potential.  Also the stone at H9 needs protection because otherwise white can use it as a pivot to push deep into the center.
>Can i save some points in the centre here? Something like M11 maybe?  Sirkut> No, it's mostly dame that would be chewed up by either side and not turn into points.  See variation.
>K12?  Sirkut> K12 would have been a little better, but look at the size of the marked positions.  R8 could have been particularly interesting because you might have gotten something by pushing in whichever direction white didn't protect.
Sirkut> nice.
> The next "random" move...
> And the next..
> The "kill" move. I didn't see R4....  Sirkut> ;) It's good to experiment, even if you feel silly sometimes.
> Im not sure this one is necessary...  Sirkut> Don't think so.  Rarely needed in a center shape (as opposed to one on the border).  I'd have waited until a few more outside liberties were taken and it was more obvious.
Sirkut> Here you can ignore white's fake threat and instead take sente and gain a few points here.  The end game is all about who can gain a point here and there by forcing the opponents hand.
Hopeful4 [18k]: hello ArielASDF [16k?]: ff
ArielASDF [16k?]: gg ArielASDF [16k?]: hi
[here White has overplayed too far from the edge. attacking at A will punish him for it]
[after W responds, B will need to reinforce losing sente, the initiative to lead play. now is a good time to attack at A instead]
[this move leads to W building a large wall working with A to outline a potentially large territory.]
[now must deal with matching/reducing W's large territorial claim. see possible alternative at 1]
[here W could play at 1 doing some damage. see playing at A instead for a different possible outcome]
[good move by W exploiting the hard to support move at 1]
[here if W extends down, B will not be able to protect on both sides so better to play this move one lower at 1]
[playing N2 is important]
[playing a little too close to contain W since A is an escape route. try to cast a wider trap like at 1]
[this move is not yet necessary. better to play at N2]
[if this was played last turn, B would be free to play somewhere else now.]
[to trap W, must cast wider trap, playing further away from W as distance buys time to play follow up moves]
[W has escaped. B still came out ahead by making territory and influence with the now large groups marked]
[an unnecessary move from W]
[good moves]
[this move does very little]
[good monkey jump move by W reduces B's territory]
[W appears to be overplaying. perhaps an intrusion at 1 to take best advantage]
[now because W has much influence in the area a behind-the-lines attack is much more difficult]
[at this point most of the big plays are done. still possible to take away some space from W by attacking top left corner or side. not much to lose since even if B doesn't live, forcing W to defend each behind-the-lines move keeps the score the same]
[into the end-game. the corners are a good place to gain an extra point or two for either player]
[W makes a mistake that B doesn't miss]
ArielASDF [16k?]: ?? g12 ?? ArielASDF [16k?]: u still there? Hopeful4 [18k]: oh, sry
ArielASDF [16k?]: ok. [this is a small move. better to play elsewhere. bottom left corner]
[B can attack at 1 instead of defending. during endgame even when threatened, playing a bigger threat rather than immediately defending will earn extra points]
[ah yes, there was a good capture that B could have got, see alternative if B played at O19]
ArielASDF [16k?]: where were u?
[unnecessary move by W]
ArielASDF [16k?]: ?
[finally someone plays here. if W had played the corner, could have won by 0.5 moku]
Cap.
I don't know why I didn't play E8 here. A one-space leap here is better than keima here, right?  >I prefer your move it to E8 (see 2 variations) but the best is to play around K16 to build influence on the top, especially utilizing black's handicap stones
Further capping. I'm terrible at keeping stones out of my territory, so these caps are basically necessary for me to get anything done.  >See previous comment.  Black should play at (possibly near) K16 or one of the other X marks to build influence and take best advantage of handicap stones.  If you do that, you can afford to let white make some territory on the left because you will be making a lot more.
This seems like a good move. Is it?  >I don't think so.  From the whole-board point of view, playing on one of the X's is more important.  Also, it leaves a cutting point for white
>This is a blunder for white.  White is better at F17.  If white is determined to play around G4, a lower move at G3 would be better.
>I don't understand this.  First, it develops toward the center, where it is harder to make territory than along a side.  Second, it does not adequately strengthen black because white can play the cut at X.    See variation, which sketches out one reasonable continuation.
Here I ignored his stone to further develop my influence on the left side. Is that important, or should I have gone after that stone? (In retrospect, I should have just played F15, acheiving both goals.)  >Frankly not a good move, because it doesn't accomplish anything. The marked black stones are not in immediate danger so this extension doesn't help them.  What's more at stake are the roughly 20 points in the corner.  If black replies differently (variation), he can secure them.
>Sorry, I don't like this move.  I would play at X, dividing white.  White has 2 responses, to defend somewhere around X, in which case you can play at P17 and take the corner, or to play around R17 and make a small corner territory (possibly pushing down along the right as well), in which case you can secure the top.  Either way is good for black.  There is another problem with your move as played, and that is it is too high (farther from the edge than white's attacking stone).  This lets white build territory underneath too easily. In exchange, black of course can push into the center.  But it takes a lot more stones to make territory in the center than along the sides so that is not necessarily productive.  If you skip ahead to the end position you can see that is basically what happened and it did not help black!!!
Here I use the one-space leap to cap him in.
>Now you see why it was important for black to have played around K16 earlier.  Another thing: although your capping move at 18 looked reasonable from a local point of view, it mainly provoked white's takeover of the top, almost 30 points, and still leaves you open on the right side where white invades next.
>If I were white I wouldn't do this quite yet.  I'd take sente by playing at either X and, after black responded, maybe then invade on the right.    23 as played is not optimum for white.  It would be more dangerous if played around Q10, for example.  By playing now at J3 black can probably kill white's marked stone.
>White can still  play around J3 effectively.
>If black is determined to play locally, it is probably better to play low rather than cap.  That way, you can get some of the side territory and force white into the center where it is harder to live.  See variation
I recognized that if I played at N7, he could have just cut them and gained more territory.  >Yes, but white has made a huge territory on the right because you did not try coming in below him, as demonstrated in the last variation.
Capping with the keima here seemed like my best option, since I was in a position to attack a stone at L8 if he tried to cut it.  >Yes.  But again, look at what white has done, which threatens to enlarge his group and/or extend it toward his isolated stone at G3.  Meanwhile, the black stone at Q3 may need protection. I think a peeping move at X, forcing white to connect, is possibly worthwhile for black.  See variation.
Damage control.  >OK, good move.   But it won't stop white from reducing your center territory somewhat.
>Excellent choice for white.
For some reason I thought this would work. Don't ask why.
For some reason he decided not to take my stone.
The two stones are nothing to worry about.
Hoping to develop territory down here.  >That's the right thinking, but X is lighter and faster.  You might also consider the symmetrically opposed move Y.  White would next play around K4 to connect eventually with the isolated marked stone and make some territory on the bottom.  Depending on what white does next, you could either extend farther to the left (around M3) or do something on the right side like X or the previously mentioned peep at Q7.
Big bulge. Minimizing his territory on the bottom center.
>Simply not worth it for either one of you.  White should have played at X.  You should have let white take the marked stone. Playing at X is a huge move, worth 30-40 points, and would salvage the game for black.  See variation!!!
Hoping to develop territory down here too.
>Not great for white.  X would have been better
This little tendril here I hoped to develop into a territory-stealing dragon, rather than any actual territory. Is this smart play, or is there something better I could have done?  >Not big enough.   You could still play at X and/or around O4 to enlarge and reinforce your corner.
Still hoping to make some territory down here. If he had cut this keima he could've killed me, but he didn't.
Likewise hoping to gain territory up here.
At this point my B18 group is dead, so instead I'm playing to restrict his growth.  >Few comments after this point.  You should be making much bigger moves to stake out territory in the areas marked.  Every dragon-like move you make to reduce the opponent's territory is worth only one point.  Moves you make to create your own territory are potentially worth more.
>Few comments after this point.  You should be making much bigger moves to stake out territory in the areas marked.  Every dragon-like move you make to reduce the opponent's territory is worth only one point.  Moves you make to create your own territory are potentially worth more.
Hoping to use this group as a base to invade with later.  >??? Those stones are already alive and safe.  Your move was worth only 2 points (1 eye + 1 captured stone).  Playing at either X is much bigger.  YOU NEED TO THINK ABOUT MAKING TERRITORY!!!
>Pointless for white.  He should have played at X.
Maintaining my prospective territory.  >Sorry, a wasteful move, worth only about 2 points.  I would still recommend K4 but will not belabor it.  Another possibility is to grab a quick 10 points with a monkey jump, then use sente either to strengthen your corner or play K4.  But usually a monkey jump sequences finishes in gote, so this may be impractical. See variation.
>Very sharp local move for white, but still not as good as K4!!!
These stones were dead, so I aimed for damage control.
At this point the group is alive.
>Your move is too small and not even necessary.    I would play at K4 here, or maybe even at K3.
As is my little dragon.
Maximizing eye space, I don't think he can kill this now.  >Your corner is safe enough.  The only question is how large it can be.  Either of the X points would be better.  You can play them out and see.
Playing for safety rather than a diagonal at M1.
>White did not need to do this.
I was afraid of a diagonal at P4, so I played there first.  >P4 would not have cost you more than a point or two.
I gave up sente here to take away a point of territory. Probably not a wise move.
This shape is alive, since he has to defined his lonely stone at D3.
>Not necessary yet.  You have time to play here after white plays E1, if he does.  I think playing at X would have been much better.
Connecting here made more sense than connecting on the other side.
This made the most sense to limit this group's growth. Is this the best move?  >Difficult choice, but X would be better.  I thought at first your move would be OK but overlooked what white had coming.
>Unfortunately this is wrong.  See variations.  Unfortunately black is probably lost at this point.
I had been hoping on capturing that group at one point, but I gave up on that.
Again, giving up sente here.
For some reason he decided to move here rather than take sente with K17. Any ideas why?  >Makes no sense to me.  Maybe white was worring about black making life on top, although this doesn't work (see variation).
My second little dragon grows.
>A total waste for white.
Setting up a snapback, which he (unsurprisingly) doesn't fall for.
Game is coming to a close, here we start closing off territory.
Limiting his territory. I didn't plan on actually capturing the F5 stone, since it wouldn't have given me much, and I'd lose sente.
Now it can't be killed no matter what.
I was afraid of a cut here. Should I have been?  >No.  But this defense was good in that it didn't reduce your own eyespace.
I was also afraid of a cut at F11.  >I don't think you had to worry.
Not sure if there was a threat there or not, I was just playing defensively.  >OK, but you had time to do this later if forced to do so.  Meanwhile you there were other things to do.  See variation.
I knew he wouldn't fall for this, but I honestly had nothing better to do.  > X (as played in the previous variation) would be good.
Just now I realized the game wasn't over yet.
>Good!  You didn't miss it after all.
You have any idea why he played here?
Dame filling.  >Either X is worth 1 point more than dame filling.
A cut at K7 might have been bad, since it would put the K5 group in a atari and give him sente.
I like this move when it is a 9Handicap game. Because of the marked stones, without the marked stones, this move would be lesser good.
This move is to protect the weakness at (A). You can also do (A) and (B) to protect this weakness and to get locked inside the corner.
I like this move, now I make pressure on O16/O17 group and G16. (A) and (B) can also be done.
This is the best answer locally (This is a perfect move) Now Black can both escape and cut the connection between G16 and D13.  I like F15 better then (A) because of the help from marked stones.
Connect is fine, and I wont get a cut against me.  and there become more pressure on O16/O17group.
With this move I wanted to make pressure on Marked stone. And dont let white connect. Since I can still Cut if he Hane at (A).
With this move black get ready to cut either (A) or cut at (B) if he do (C). Can also Hane at B if he connects at (A)
Now Black did the cut that he made ready. Now White got two weaks group.  Ready to get attacked.
This is a mistake by black. Marked stone can not be captures anyway, so this atarti is wrong. The right way would be (A).
This move is almost the only move after the Atari mistake. With this move black protects the dubble atari at (A) and
This was also a bad move by black. Atari at (A) would be the right move, and white would be very weak with 3groups.  "Look at the example what would be right"
This was also a mistake by black, and (A) would be right. But this move also protect what is showed in one of the examples.  See both examples to see why (A) would be right
This was wrong by black again. Marked stones is allmost dead, and white have abandon them, if not black does a very big mistake and they can live easy.  Since (A) cant be captures marked stones is very weak.  But since (B) and (C) is very weak (D) would be the right move for black
This was also wrong, Marked stones still needs to get protected and that sould be done with (A)
I think all most of the moves Black does in this groups fight is wrong. The main reason black did this move was because he read wrong, and thought black would protect the marked group, and then black could connect at (A)
Also a mistake by black, black still read wrong, and thought white would proctect white's group.
Black could still live with the marked stones, but he abandoned it. since white would be to strong. Now black wanted to to force white to block at (A) and have a easyer job to kill the other marked group.
This was also to just get out of truble. But this is a wrong shape, (A) would be better for Black.
This was also a mistake by black, the reason he did it was because he thought/hoped white would do (A).  See example what black hoped white would do.
Since white did not do what black whated black abanded marked stones.
This move was just to se if black could do anything, he did not thought he could escape, but he hoped to get a cut at (A) and get one of the marked stones in the exchange.
This move was done so black could atari with (A), if white blocks black at (B)
Now white needs to protect the atari, and black have (A) where white cant move.
With this move black wanted do get something from the exchange, but if this was a good exchange is not sure. since white killed the group, and got a wall.
Needs to protect the atari, and now black got two cuting points. (A) and (B)
Now white cuts, and white can choose to keep either A group or B.
white choose (A) group, and black gets (B)
I think this is a small mistake for black, and (A) would been better. And more normal, I cant explain why black did this move.
This is maybe alitle overplay by black but a okey move. (A) would been better
With this move black just want to block white from go above him.
Same as last move black did, black and make a cut treath at (A)
This was a bad move, because of the shape, but this move was done because black wanted to cut the connect between (A) and (B). The bad shape is: empty triangle, K16+K15+L16
With this move Black wanted to cut (A) and (B), and it can be done.
This was to get connected (A) and (B).
This was to push white. Black will still alive of white attack at (A), but black still got weakness at (B)
This move was because the ladder does not work, and black does not wanna lose the connection he just did.
This move was to protect Blacks weakness at (A) and (B). But white can still invade at (C)
Same reason again. did not want to loose the connection
This was bad by black, the best move would been (A), this protect the cut on (B) and (C) invasion
Did not wanna get in a ladder, and let marked stones get weak.
With this move Black abanded marked stones, but still (A) would been a better stone
Now (A) would been better, after the (B) and (C) mistake.
Now black thought this would been better then block the atari at (A) and (B). But (A) or (B) would been better.
Just to block again
Black was scared of losing the corner, and was passive. This is wrong.  And (A) would been better. If black do (A), (B) would been a better stone later.
This was a to direct attack against white. Black wanted to cut at (A) or (B), and get one of the marked stones.
Now black just wanna get out of problem with (A). But the negative is (B) and (C) stone is starting to get weak.
This is a very good move by black.  This way white cant cut (A) and (B) connection.
Black did this because he did not want black to get inside his territory.
Black captures the stone.
Now white got some weakness.  But black is still weak in the corner
This was okey for black
This was wrong, and black sould not atari, (A) would been better.
This was to protect marked stones. But protecting (A) would maybe been better.
Connecting.
Did not wanna lose marked stone
This was also a mistake, but I think the group is dead.
Now I need to choose either group. So this move was VERY VERY bad. (A) or (B) had been right.
This was just a way to force the capture.
This move was to protect the marked group, without this group woud be a to big loss.
This move was very good. Now marked group is still captured.
This was just passive. and black wanted to secure some points at the bottom.
This is okey move. but I think maybe (A) would been the same. But easyer.
This is a mistake by black.  Black needed to connect at R4  "See how this corner sould been played out by black." Rest of the game is not commented.  *END OF COMMENTS*  -TheBeast
*BLACK RESIGN*
Beh: To play at A is better.
Beh: Why not play at A?
Beh: Probably the most aggressive answer.
Beh: This move is a bit slow. The play at A would be joseki.
Beh: White is trying to make a base.
danieleff: Maybe R10 would have been better. I thought white will run, but with S3, its quite poweful (even alive?), so he counterattacked.  Beh: Too early to say if White is alive or not. White definitely has the potential to be alive.
Beh: This strengthens the white stone. Why not continue the run with A?
danieleff: I thought this was forcing enough, but he just connected the 2 weakish white groups. oops.
Beh: Why not a play at A (see variations)?
danieleff: If he gets out this cutting stone, I have a floating black goup. Maybe lost a move here?  Beh: This move helps to defend the corner against an invasion at A. A play elsewhere would perhaps be better because there are still bigger points left.
danieleff: separate this from N5, and attack was my strategy
Beh: This move is not good. Don't touch a stone you are attacking.
danieleff: I hoped he wouldl not H3. I think that would look pretty bad for me  Beh: Yes, H3 would have been bad.
Beh: The upper right and top are more important.
danieleff: Actually this was my intention, but he got a ponnuki.  Beh: You got youself a weak position and White got stronger.
Beh: It would be better to defend you weak groups before attacking. The marked attacks would be severe.
Beh: Not a good move.
Beh: Small, but helps to settle the group.
danieleff: Big center moyo was forming here, had to invade.  Beh: Better to invade earlier as it could be hard to survive here.
danieleff: I think this was quite OK for me.
Beh: Too deep and too near to Blacks position.
danieleff: Had to secure that big group.
danieleff: I dunno if black J18 would do anything.  Beh: It would have been possible to play J18 before F14 as it would connect Blacks group if White would not respond with G18. Minimum win for Black would be 1 point.
danieleff: It seemd that the 3 O14 stones are mine too...
danieleff: O10 could work, but I had so many cutting points, I was not sure  Beh: O10 would have been possible, too.
danieleff: Maybe try should have tried to save P10 stones, but decided not to, he would definitely fight to save O11 group now.  Beh: The White group would get out nevertheless.
danieleff: I should have saved with O7 at least. Big loss  Beh: Yes.
Beh: White won about 10 with this move.
danieleff: Looked like the biggest point in the open.
danieleff: endgame moves from here.
Beh: Bad move from White, see variation.
Beh: Again a bad move from White.
> Bob:  Hello, and bonyour!  Don't worry about language.  I am from Bosnia, so we are on similar positions.
>> In this position,  is making a pincer at J17 better ?  > Bob:  It is better to play on J17 as you are stronger on upper then on right side. Also, as you are in front as a black (plus with handicap stones) better is to strengthen your position then attacking at once.  In handicap games white just enjoy in dividing and fighting.
> Bob:   Is that what black needs in this position?  No.  For my point of view still it is better  to avoid conflict.  N15 for black and wait for white's next move.  This move helps white in upper side as you know :  contact moves promote settling  groups.  See>   http://senseis.xmp.net/?44PointLowApproachOneSpaceLowPincerOnePointJump#1
>> I played this and J4 with the idea of attacking the P11 group.  > Bob:  It is optimistic to think in that way as black in this position.  What I mean is that white is still alive with his center group, besides  black is still in front with points.  You may choose also E6 here aiming to make more territory on the bottom side while attacking center white group later.  For me it was better for white to go  E6 except B4 with his last move.
>> To capture the cutting stone, but the white territory in the corner seems too big, but I don't see what I could have done  > Bob:  One can say you have right, but nobody can say that you finished this game now.  Off course, white has to straggle for victory as black is still in front .  If you look better on this position it is easy to see that B8 was excellent move. Now, black can easily continue with his plan to make territory while attacking center white group.
> Bob:  Sometimes we are so greedy.  White is going to slowly with this move.  This is not so many points as you think.  Sometimes you have to invest in future.   Good investment for black.
>> Starting the attack on the white group  > Bob:  Nice.
>> Is this move good ? I don't want to let white make good shape, but maybe there are better moves  > Bob:  No,   good move.  Proper timing.
>> I think this is a bad move. But if I play H10 for instance, I think W K6 makes at least one eye  > Bob:  Good decision. Also black have to make territory while taking pressure on white.
>> white's mistake. I think W J15 captures and wins the fight  > Bob:  Loosing this group for white is loosing the game.  But for black ?  It is likely that you have been lucky here as different result also has been possible after this fight.  My advice to you Peej is something like >  Try to be more patient at the very beginning of the game.   No more comments  Bye.
I also thought about ogeima at C13 or making sanrensei with Q10. Couldn't really say which one is better or whether it is just matter of style.  Blue: I'd say it is just a matter of style. I like your choice: in a handicap game, secure moves like O17 that make profit are preferred. Also, C13 could lead to complications (not necessarily a bad thing, but in a handicap game, it's not needed). A sanrensei makes influence towards the only white stones, so I would not do that yet.
Maybe just F16 is better here?  Blue: I think so. You have the support from the top right.
Blue: This feels a little narrow, in that it is too close to Q10, making that move worth less.
Blue: I haven't seen this response before, and I feel it isn't good. As you saw, it is not sente, because W can sacrifice P6 and live inside. If a move is not sente, it must achieve something, and this doesn't really do that.  You are already strong above, and weak below. So I would prefer a move that supports Q4. O4 is traditional, you could go for O3 to keep high-low balance on the bottom.
I think that White at B4 would be painful.  Blue: Well, it's not too painful. But B at B4 prevents it while making a lot of territory. If you are ahead in a game, and there are no urgent moves, look for a move like this that makes a good chunk of solid points.
Sanda mentioned that I should have blocked from the other side, at C16. But wouldn't this wall be looking into somewhere where points couldn't be made.
What I got here is a group still unsettled. Was there a better way to give it a shape?
I misread the following battle and lost considerate ammount of points.  Blue: This is a point I'd like to hammer home, and it's really important in handicap games. If you are ahead, like way ahead, don't complicate things. A simple move like L4 secures territory, halts the advance into the left, and leaves him with the boring option of up. Following him up on the left, or harrasing the up from the right while tidying up that group, is nice and safe.
Looks like this move was a mistake. I get no good continuation after this.  Blue: I agree, I prefer J5.
Right here.
Maybe better something like H7? But I was afraid of cut K6.  Blue: I'd say if the right got cut, it could go to the right for safety.
It ended with W having a big moyo.
Maybe too careful.  Blue: Too true. If you don't think you could defend the setup as is from the 3-3 invasion, practice until you can. A good knowledge of when the 3-3 invasion works, depending on support for the 4-4, is very valuable. Just try things out, either with someone else, on your own, or with a book or Sensei's library.
That's where Ellisar came into play. After this move I lost triangled stones. Which decided the game.  Blue: These stones were always in trouble. They aren't strongly connected to a solid group. I show a branch which keeps a lot of them safe, but there are a lot of variations.  You may find it a useful exercise in game to just quickly take the role of your opponent and think "How can I disrupt that connection?" You don't have to actually do it, but if you quickly find yourself unsure of how such an attack would go, it's a signal to look at it more thoroughly.
This one looks like also too careful. Maybe should have been where W played next.  Blue: I agree.
Looks like I should have played double hane here.
I didn't like the following fight. Is there a better way here?  Blue: I couldn't really say you did anything wrong.
Blue: Don't do this, just take. It leaves the side unsealed, which gives you a chance to do something small later.
Maybe too defensive.  Blue: Yes. Definitely.
I aimed at weakness around marked groups. After re-reading it I considered it impossible. I'm not sure whether B an get here something or not.  Blue: He can't, unless W makes a mistake.
Maybe I should have gone to ko here, but black group at the upper-left looks like a good source of ko-threats.
I kind of knew I should just answer this move at A, but something kept me from doing it. I just wanted so badly to play at B, that it fogged my mind :)  -- I do not think that is so bad.  B is very big after all.
-- Hm, I think this seems a little odd.  There are many possibilities here, but I think b can treat these stones lightly.
I know this atari is bad, but I didn't realize it at the time.  --  Yes, definitely, after this, w got a unfairly good result.  If Q7 instead, it looks much better for b.  I think Q7 really seems better.
Now white is silly I think.  --  Agreed.  W is trying to make the b group a floating group, but this seems like a strange way to go about it.  This move looks like it should just end up making b thick here.
I was reading all kinds of sequences in the corner, but of course I should leave this move for later, now I can't play A very well later on.  -- Yes.
--  This is another strange move by w in my opinion.
--  What about double hane here?  See var.
I guess this checking extension is way too far from my wall, asking for trouble.  --  Seems ok to me, but these questions are difficult for someone at my level.  The reason this seems fine is even if w play as he did in the game, then he makes two weak groups.  So even if this is too far from wall, it would be difficult for w to punish because he has a weak/open position in the corner.  I would also consider F3 here, which is probably what I would play.  The situation with the M5 group is not entirely clear yet, so I would probably want to play from that side.
--  Here I think b should maintain pressure on the corner.  B4 threatens C3 taking away the eyespace of two stones, but also keeps C9 stone disconnected.  If b does not play B4, w can immediately play at C5 which would be very nice for w.
--  Not really very secure here, if you were going to peep, I would do it from the other side.  This move does not really strengthen your group that much.  See variation.
--  This feels very good for w and also brings M4 weakness into play.  I think this proves that D8 and F11 sequence was not good for b.
--  F7 seems to be safer in this shape.  This is why D8 seems to be not much help for your shape.
I hadn't seen this white move when I played the move 'A', but luckily he answered my forcing moves and I got the connection after all.
--  What about F5 instead?
-- Looks like a good idea to me.
-- Hm, what about J18 here?  Too crazy perhaps?
--  If you wanted to keep w groups separated I think H18 is more direct.  Otherwise this looks like it will end in gote, or w will be able to connect.
--  This move seems a little odd now because w group can connect at H18 anytime.  Instead I would try K9 here or some similar idea.
I didn't really know how to handle this, I was expecting him to protect his upper side group.  --  If you think that situation with upper side group was sente for b, then you should play there immediately.  Usually if your opponent ignores your sente move you should not follow him but attack the weakness he left immediately.  Otherwise he might fix some other weakness and still come back to the first weakness and you get nothing.  So here you could try K19 so at least w cannot connect, and then see what happens with the group.
-- This looks odd, strange shape for b.
Maybe this is not the right move? I realized after the game that I really should have played A before he could, even that means letting the group survive.  --  Survival of the group is not even in question unless you start with K19 or something similar to prevent the connection.
-- Bad move, "thank you move" in my opinion.  Should play O16 instead.
--  Why not cut here?  Let the top live in gote, then attack the center group, while taking two stones profit.  O14 move would look immediately silly if you cut it.
--  Again, why not cut?
I thought this was a blunder.  -- Oh, I see now... you were trying to kill everything.  I think that is kind of unreasonable, but better would be to take profit in sente and attack w center group next in my opinion.
Here I didn't dare take his eyes away because of my cutting points, A and B.  --  Hm.  I think you can try it.  Cutting points are not so bad, you should have a view to make him live and then still attack center group.
I thought I could maybe strengthen myself first and then take the eyes away :)  --  It is not likely you could kill the top I think but the center is weaker.  I think this attack is somewhat from the wrong side though, as w can simply play K9 and your attack is over.  So I would attack from that side instead.
--  Here I think w makes his group unconditionally alive, but also threatening the corner, however... he left alone the center group which is under attack.  I think you must be bold.  Attack the center group.  If the center group is not alive, even if your corner could also be killed, w will not win.  So w must defend center group now against your attack.  Start with K9 or something.
I guess I should have just cut at A, but I wanted to attack on a large scale.  -- I think I would try K9, but attack on a large scale is good, I agree.  This K11 though looks a little odd since H8 side is much weaker!
Now I missed the obvious play at A, and he punishes me from it quite seriously.  --  B or C maybe also are OK.  You can just make sure your left stones can still connect and b has a good game here.
--  This seems bizarre, too territory-oriented, not thinking enough about the weakness of the H7 stones, and too clever by half.
I thougt I got back to the game with this move, but I was in time trouble and couldn't think very well in the continuation.
Maybe I should just play at A now, but I didn't want to let him get away with the centre group.  --  I would play B here (K8).  Take away your worries about the cut, but still looking at the center group.
--  This is similar to my K8 idea but seems less secure.
-- For some reason I think M12 feels better.
My notes end here, but he later cut at A and captured my stones on the left, and soon after that I lost on time.  --  W still has zero eyes in the center here so I think b has played a good game.  I think if not for time pressure, b has a good chance to kill this.
Firstly i want to thank the person reviewing this game, im playing as White, i starting Go for abt 2.5 months now and this is the 1st game i asked to be reviewed. I beileve there is alot to improve in this game and i won because of black mistakes. As this is my 1st game being review i might have added too much comment. Secondly, i have pointed out some of my mistake that i saw after relooking at my game, hopefully it will not offense you that i marked them. I still not use to playing with less den 25min think time so alot of mistake was made.  Dmitry: Hello, my name is Dmitry, I'll review your game.
Dmitry: Possible, but little bit too far. Good moves here are: A or B (chinese fuseki) for developing on bottom side. Locally I prefer closer move at C.
Dmitry: Good move, Black has two corners now. Next Black move should be at A.
i beileve this is a normal start, but i was thinking should i have expand on the left or invade into the top? Dmitry: Corners->sides->center - it is normal flow of the game. Hoshi point is not for making territory immediately, but for influense, so here I prefer to play at A or B (to stabilize corner), or C or D move (chinese fuseki)
Dmitry: Too early. There are a lot of big points on the board, like A or B. Even if Black will live here, White will gain huge outward influence.
Dmitry: Bad, should be A, see variation.
i beileve Q2 is the proper move to kill here is there anyway to escape (black) if i played Q2? i have pointed another mistake that i beileve its a sure kill but not sure if its possible to escape, could you help see if i was wrong? Dmitry: see variation.
Dmitry: Sente of course, but too slow. Good idea is to save moves like that as ko-threat.
even tho i lost the corner im still quite happy with the shape of my seed, should i really be happy? sorry if the question seem silly for a 12k player.
Dmitry: Good, but too close to White's wall. A is better.
Dmitry: As for me better is to stabilize marked stones. See variation.
Dmitry: Bad idea. Now Black has two weak groups in White's zone.
Dmitry: Strange move.
At this point i beileve F1 at this moment is too early Dmitry: F1 is sente for Black
The next move should have been J2 once again mistake here should be a sure kill here too. Dmitry: Should be J2 of course.
Dmitry: Too slow, there are no need to take this stone immediately and shicho is good for you. Better is to attack marked stones, for example at E7 or D6.
whats the correct respone to this move should i knight to B9? i was thinking that will result in black forming influnce towards mid if i go to B9, therefore i picked C9 instead since most of the players i played with does that. Dmitry: I prefer to push at C8 here. This is very good for White to build big third line wall.
another mistake by me should have been B9 Dmitry: C8 is ok. Black marked stones are still dead, but possible troubles after cut at C8 give Black a chance to save his dead marked stones.
Dmitry: Why??? Now Black could cut at C10. Why don't just C11  or C10?
So many mistake i made after i relook at my game. F8 will trap that 2 stone
i realise i didn't need to waste my sente here as the group is aready dead, would have played E9 instead for safety. Not sure whats the best move at this moment  Dmitry: E9 is natural here.
Local fight wouldn't get me any pt now so i decide to invade for some pt, once again im not sure where the best place to invade at or should i have expand my land along the 7th line.
Dmitry: Good, but K16 is more flexible imho. Low (third line) stones in invasion are good for building life, high (fourth line) stones are good for running out
Dmitry: Good direction. Upper left is bigger.
after looking at this i was thinking this is a very weak move from me, wat would a better move be? Dmitry: Here you need to stabilize marked stones, which are weak so far. See var.
i beileve he was trying to build up his moyo for the corner at this moment.
but instead i have no idea wats he doing so i played by instinct for the next 4 moves
i spend 3 min thinking here but sadly didn't see the weak point at K6
and this move i know he escaped and lose my conceration for the next few moves
Dmitry: Why don't just L7? See var. This local fight is not urgent for White (all your groups are safe). Here I prefer attack upper left side.
here i was so determind that he had escape and did not see this move could have seal the game here, (makes u wonder how both black and me are 12k right) Dmitry: Even pro players sometimes make one-move-mistakes...;)
6 move and still no one saw that...
Dmitry: Bad idea, still better move is at E13 or E15.
Dmitry: Should be M10.
should i escaped or give up this 4 stone at this point of the game? Dmitry: In most cases it isn't good idea to run away with small groups like that - chance to save is poor, and opponent during attacking your stones makes strong position. Sacrifice these stones and make profit - this is good strategy. See var.
Dmitry: Q11 is better.
Dmitry: very passive, almost pass.
Dmitry: What about P16? See var.
at this point of game i thought black will play R16 and i might be able to make it into a ko fight or a seki with S13
Dmitry: Why?? See var.
is there a better way to play this?
Dmitry: Is marked group is alive? See var.
Dmitry: It's urgent to save marked group, for example at O18 and next T18.
Dmitry: Better attack at O18 and try to make live.
Dmitry: Losing move. Should be R19.
i was sure this corner will become a ko fight with this move but he move R19 which den seal his fate. Dmitry: Now the corner is dead, there are no ko. See var.
Jswong84 [12k]: thx chi963 [12k]: thanks  I beileve i have played quite poor in this game, if black didn't make the mistake and lost the corner i would have lost. Once again thank you for review this game.  Dmitry: I'm not sure about geme result if Black could save his corner. Try to count points carefully. Now the game is almost equal, remember, that marked black stones are dead. So white should make something in upper left to win.  Play a lot of no_fast games, look at the whole board, remember proper order of steps - "first stabilize your group, next attack" and your will improve! Good luck!
XCMeijin: This particular joseki I am not familiar with. Although the end result seems OK for me, can you point out some better, less risky paths?
R: Another popular variation is R6. Both are complicated. Check out "kogo joseki dictionary" for some variations.
R: R2 is a mistake. The normal move for white is S3 here, see var.
R: See variation... w took advantage here. The proper punishment is p2
XCMeijin: I think this looks good for me.  R: compared to the standard variation, w took abit of advantage.
R: this looks like an overplay.
XCMeijin: Maybe this is a bit too obvious, greedy? It's hard for white to live, but also not that easy to kill.  Any thoughts?  R: L5 seems fine here.
XCMeijin: Empty triangle, but i don't think i had a choice
XCMeijin: After this move, when I look at the whole board, my first thought is that white seems to have the lead  R: b is quite good actually. The reason is that H3 died. Also, D9 should be at around R11.
XCMeijin: Would you recommend playing here? Where is the better point?  R: Somewhere around R11 is probably bigger, since both black and white want that point.
XCMeijin: I think i was a bit surprised with this move, although not in a bad way. White has made himself overconcentrated a bit, and the D16 stone is still open. What do you think?  R: No, C12 is appropriate here.  It would be different if D9 were at C10. But here it's almost expected. F17 would be rather comfortable for black
XCMeijin: Classic approach... would you recomment another move?  R: This should work out fine... C17 is another possibility.
XCMeijin: I'm particularly proud of what happened from this move onward. Am I right to be?
XCMeijin: This move looked interesting to me, so i played it. Thoughts?  R: seems appropriate. white has to be careful.
R: Seems like overplay.
R: w is in trouble.
R: now b is winning.
XCMeijin: Ideal distance from my shimari?  R: Good! the biggest point on the board.
XCMeijin: Maybe this wasn't the best way to attack this stone...
R: I prefer to take P11
XCMeijin: Technically white is dead, but you'll see i left some weaknesses behind...
R:
XCMeijin: Perhaps i played N10 out of greed. I probably should've played at A to reduce complications. Thoughts?  R: yes, n10 is unreasonable.
XCMeijin: I had read up to here...
XCMeijin:... But not here T.T
R: t14 is a mistake. t13 kills cleanly.
XCMeijin: I don't think playing to start another ko at T9 would've worked anyway...
XCMeijin: I would've thought this was a big enough threat...
R: wrong direction. The stones at N10 are not useful. How about something like K12 instead?
XCMeijin: I feel i have the upper hand at this point in the game.  R: n9 is a mistake for white. o13 would have been better.
XCMeijin: This move proved to be a whole world of pain for me. How best to deal with this?  R: K17 seems alright to start with...
R: looks like overplay.
XCMeijin: Stupid T.T I thought i could live in the corner. Prob should've just played at Q16, white is still far from 2 eyes...  See variation.
XCMeijin: Another Ko i could not win T.T  R: this is not a ko! o15 is dead.
XCMeijin: I believe i may be a bit behind at this point... What would you suggest?  R: not clear. Seems about even. Depends on the endgame i think. See a variation  R: End of comments.
XCMeijin: Another mistake...
XCMeijin: ... I forgot about that...
You focus allot on the corner here while there are more improtant things to attend. However, so does you opponent so not much harm is done. A move on the left side is bigger then fighting this corner right now.
To far. Black splits and then what? Maybe H17 is a better choise then M17. However the left side is still bigger.
Good but a bit late. Had black placed here before you you would be in much trouble.
Ok black invades... what to do what to do. You sholde use this situation to strenghten you possition. Let black have a smal area while you build a fortres.
This is a bit to offensive. You should play more defensive and strenghten you left side here.
You cut here in an attempt to kill blacks group? This is good if you succeed but if you fail it's horrible since it will leave black strong and with allot of potential since you cutting him meens that your groups are split apart. Again you shuld play defensive and build terretory up against your wall to the right.  A move like G2 is better. That in combination with your E5 move at D5 instead looks nice right?
now you where forced to make terretory facing the middle instead of the edge. Such terrotory is much harder to protect.  ok, black attacks. Look at your options. You can secure terretory or try to kill black. Killing black here is allmost impossible but that is what you'r trying to do by cutting him. A move like G10 or maybe even H10 would give you much terretory here. Let black poke a hole in your thought out terretory and defend the rest instead.
ok. now it's obvious that black will not die. So you schould play away form him and make you terretory insted of poking him.
black is extending further and further into your doman to stop him you cant play so close. He will only cut you over and over again.
You now try to defend everything but most of it fails.
H7 is HUGE!
Still H7
black keeps cutting and cutting. Ha has a live centerpiece that he extends his tentacles from.
Again, play AWAY not so close. Black will only cut you up.
ok.. now the M13, K13 group is in danger. Save it fast!  End of review.
eladden [14k]: tsk
janr: in general it is dangerous to play both A and B high, as the black moves at C and D are difficult te answer.  Usually, I play either white E or F
janr: so I think it's rather early for white to go into the corver.  I would prefer A or B
janr: black should clearly defend (e.g. at A)
janr:white cutting through is very painful for black.
janr: I would prefer A, developing faster, (while still attacking)
janr: it is important to avoid that the marked group becomes weak.  So if white intends to end in gote on the left (by defending the cut at A), then he should avoid pushing (from behind) here.  Black has a weak group, let him solve his problem himself, and let him spend moves saving his stones.  It is sufficient for white to play B e.g.
Not sure if I have done the right thing with his weak group. I don't think I capitalized enough on the attack.  janr: I would expect black now attacks around A.  After all this pushing, white needs to defend the upper side.  Locally, I think B is better.  It avoids that C becomes a forcing move.  C helps black to make shape, se black does not want it to be a forcing move.
janr: it may be better for black to first push at A.  The stone on the upper side gets stronger and the move is sente so black gets the turn here anyway.
janr: A is probably better as it avoids white making eyes by capturing a stone.
janr: Blacks move is somewhat slow.  I would prefer A
janr: after white played A he has run out and can make eyes at several places.  Therefore I think capturing one stone is small now.  How about attacking further (and strengthening white further at the same time) at B ?
janr: again a slow move
janr: black is strengthening white.  I would prefer to simply answer at A
janr: this move is purely defensive.  If white wants to defend, how about doing something active at the same time?  I would first consider A, which may be sente: B, C and D will follow and white would have protected his weakness at E at a large extent by playing sente.  If white plays tenuki, he will lose points in the corner.
janr: I think around A is the biggest point for both sides
Besides this, what should I do?
janr: this looks like a very strange move.  It is purely defensive and as such it seems reasonably effective.  How about playing at the intersection of the influence of the two weak groups (A) ?  Or locally,  being more ambitious at B ?
janr: now black gives to white what whited wanted to have: the small space on the lower right.
janr: black has now enhanced his moyo and limited white.
I think this is a mistake. Misread the sente down below.  janr: locally, I prefer A.  Globally, maybe reducing with B or first gaining some influence with C can be considered
Very big... not sure which bad plays lead to this result.  janr: yes, but personally, I don't like the solid extension towards the empty space.
janr: again, i don't like to solid extension.
janr: I dont think this is necessary.  Maybe it's better to continue to center (A) or play good endgame. (B-E)
janr: it's painful to draw back like this.
janr: I prefer the endgame moves on the left
janr: Both white groups live and connecting seems unnecessary, and this move does not threaten to kill black.  So I prefer the endgame moves on the left.
janr: with A and B, white enclosed the 8 marked points.  That's 4 point per gote move.   The move at C is more than 10 points.  D is more than 7 points sente.
janr: why help white to connecthis weak point at A?  Simply defending seems ok here.
Initiated the end game procedure..
janr: so why didnt get black this point? it is sente for him!   Locally, A is better as it avoids black playing at A in reverse sente.
janr: This is a neutral point.  it is better to play a real point and in this way force black to connect at the neutral point.  e.g. if white plays at A in sente and then at B,  C becomes sente.
janr: nobody is playing at A which is sente for black.
janr: white can not cut.  The connection is useless.
janr: connecting two living groups is not necessary.  Locally, A is better
---------------- Your two best approach moves are these. Preventing the shimari is big, and you should be able to build up the right side and threaten a large territory due to the position of R16. White may choose to pincer but you have stones to each side and as long as you don't make a second weak group, you should see opportunity to counter-attack.  It may feel that something like O3 sets up to build territory on the bottom, but C3 and O3 are so low that it is difficult for them to expand a lot. And in this scenario, R16 is there to help you, too.
---------------- This move is a little too quiet. It's something you see more against a Chinese style fuseki where coming in from the front of the 3-4 is dangerous. Here you have the support in the form of R16 to come from the front. Preventing a shimari is a large play at any stage of the game.
---------------- You may want to think about moving this a line higher, these three stones create a very low position all strung out on the third line, it's hard for them to expand much as a result.
-------------------- They are sort of miai, but be aware of these points. C6 is important to undermine white's left side potential. G3 is important because it can provide needed support to the L3 stones. P17's shimari is large, but either of these is quite large also, I'd play C6 personally. If white gets F3, you may need to begin rescuing the L3 stones, which gives white a chance to close up at C5, getting both major points in the lower left.
Althought capturing the two white stones looks large, you get a bigger dig into white territory by rescuing your own, about a four or five point difference overall.
------------------ The difference in points as marked. Here you gain 3 points (two prisoners + O7), the other route gains you no points, but white loses about 7 in prisoners and points he has to close up.
------------------ Don't let yourself get pushed around in yose, especially not in a close game. There are fewer points to defend in the upper point of this territory than below. P2 is a valuable reverse sente move that affords you than blocking O4 in gote and giving up all of your Q2 area. The score estimator is always rough, but you can see the difference in the variation's territory with it.
------------------ Focus on these points, the capture is small, and ends in gote or stays as ko giving white the chance to simply take the point back.   A is a rather large sente yose move, you should probably play this right away. B is reverse sente, but prevents white from attempting a ko or geting a pretty large sente of his own. C is also sente and sets up some other forcing moves on white.
------------------ Looks like you guys missed these. Each is a worth a point and combined with getting even just another of the sente yose points like A8 could have spelled the difference.
------------------ The opening and middlegame were as you said, rather reserved and quiet for both. No major captures territory swings for either player. That also means that yose becomes a large part. The closer the game, the more crucial it is to slow down and look for those plays that save or squeeze just a few extra points out.   In particular, find all the plays that you are sure end in sente for you, and play them first. As many as you can. They may only be worth a few points each but the pile up very fast. Don't be afraid to take a large reverse sente or gote either, defending is as important in attacking.  Quite a close game, you did well; you just have to be a bit more wary about building yourself in the fuseki and really work on seeing those yose points. Don't get caught up locally.  Good luck, I hope this helps you in the future!
moves like this aren't good -- they don't help you... but they help opponent
now white is walking first
after game comment (w): after having taken the corner i wanted to do something about blacks right side and i wanted to use r6 because b refused to play q6- so i played r8  ------------  CC:  this is not really a good idea -- remember that black has the san san rei advantage on the right -- so you don't need to expect to get everything -- you should have been happy with the corner and moved elsewhere ... O17 or something
something lighter is better here -- see var.
after game comment (w): i know the situation around o8 is not solved yet. but i thought b doestnt have a simple way to capture it. i didnt want to miss the opportunity to do something about the right side so i played r14.  i do now see that. in this game was probably thinking more about disturbing my opponent instead of caring about my own territory and groups.  ----------------- again the most important thing here is to remember that your opponent is allowed to get some points... especially when he starts with a san-san-rei.... so now in an effort to keep him from getting anything, you have 2 very weak groups... which actually should be thought of as negative points...
strange shape
luckily black made this bad move
CC:: another big slip for black!! he coul dhave really taken advantage of the wall if he played C15 now!!  very important to see var!
after game comment (w): after this race i was quiete happy having saved my group and having prevented black from making too much territory on the right side which he was dominating after the fuseki. of course he got a nice wall, which i was not so happy about.   ---------------  nice solid shimari -- the wall is far less powerful now that you have it --
terrible move   he is using his thickness for points instead of for attack --
after game comment (w): i am not sure whether i could/should have saved the corner stones at d4 but i was glad that i had such a strong group at h5 facing the black wall preventing him from making too much out of it.   -------  not bad position on the board here  this move is unnec.  should do something that gets you points
little slack maybe think about hane
gote --   sente is so important here .. you should find a way to protect in sente
huge loss!
bad move obviously... you punished well
very good move!  nice!
CC:: not nec...
after game comment (w): i think this gote move wasnt necessary
after game comment (w): best move here? necessary?
The exchange of the last two moves is bad for white. White does not need his marked stone, while black's marked stone is in a nice position. It would be better for white to play at A instead. The rest of the moves are good. White has a nice splitting attack.
After the marked stone white should finish de sequence properly. See variation. If you wanted to play the move you played, you should not have played the marked move. Now the marked move costs you a liberty and costs black nothing.
This is a bit too optimistic. Black will push and create cutting points that will make white weak. If you want to shut this black group in, you should first attack the two black stones so you can use the same moves to attack as to shut in. See variations for some ideas.
Now your position is full with cutting points.
This is too aggressive. Better to play at A.
Good move. A black cut there would have given you something to think about.
Good move. This shuts the black group in.
Good move. This definately kills black.
This is an overplay. Black can capture your stone. It would be better to play at A instead. That would strengthen your position while threatening to kill the black group.
Yes, Virginia, I really did manage to lose from here.  His group in the upper right is dead (m17 is a little weak, but I think I could have handled it), and he's got small life on the right side.  I've got massive thickness, and NO IDEA what to do with it.  What I actually did was push him down the left side, which is basically just trying to make territory in the middle - not kosher, I know.  You're supposed to use thickness to attack, but he doesn't have any particularly weak groups on the board at this point.  I'm thinking now, I should have either invaded at c14 or expanded my lower group, maybe to m3?  I'm also curious about his shape on the lower right - would a 3-3 invasion work, and if so, when should I have done it?  I don't think a 3-3 invasion in the lower right is possible at this point. Maybe later if you are stronger in the area. An invasion around C14 looks like a good idea to me. I think the move you play next is a little to close to your thickness.  It's correct that you shouldn't use thickness to make territory, but attacking is not the only possibility. You can also invade, as you thought of yourself. In general thickness means that you have more freedom to do what you want without getting into trouble.
Black nicely makes the exchange of the marked moves so white becomes more overconcentraded.
weak, d11 or e12 would have been better.  I'm not so sure, but that are certainly other possibilities.
Now he's really not very attackable; my pretty walls are facing each other anyway, which limits their usefulness.  I knew my three stones on the bottom needed attention, but was nervous about how much solid territory he was making along the side - tried to reduce him and connect to the bottom, which didn't work out too well   Connecting to the bottom is almost impossible in this situation, because black's last moves blocks the way and black also has the strong marked stones. You should be consistent now and make territory in the centre or else your last nine moves will almost go to waste. See variation.
Moves like this ask for a cut. It would have been better to play this move at A. The marked stones are not important. You can consider them as forcing moves and leave them alone.
hoping here that he might let me close him back in while eating c8 & d9.  no such luck  That would have been nice, but you cannot expect your opponent to make bad moves.
You should have playd at A now. If you let black atari that stone at A it goes completely to waste and a lot of your influence too.
don't know what I was thinking here. should have connected at f11, then cut him off after if he didn't connect
finally decided to do something on the bottom.  I was feeling pressured at this point - he had actual cash along the side, while my upper 'territory' was looking pretty leaky.  I didn't want to close it off around the 12 line, because he would have ended up with a wall along 11 (or so).  I would have to take time to close off f18, so he'd probably get to take the lower left corner first, and then my lower stones would be in trouble.  So I decided to take the corner first
I think I could have survived d3, though it would have been messy. Anyway, he took the sacrifice  Black should have played d3. See variation
at this point, I mentally filed my lower left position as 'strong', which got me into a LOT of trouble later.   Your lower left is indeed strong. The trouble was because black got too much strength close to it.
I think we both messed up in ignoring G9 for so long after this  G9 is not so important.
Good move.
Ok.  At this point, I think my prospects were still pretty good. Because I was so confident of the left side, I decided to push into the corner rather than block him off.  I did get the corner, but lost the entire lower left quarter of the board.  Bad trade! Was I being overconfident in attacking the corner, or did I just mishandle the follow up?  What would your next move have been?  I think I would have played at A and make territory at the bottom.
This move gives you nice possibilities. It should have been at A.
You can be more aggressive here. See variation.
He could have lived easily by taking s3 & s2, but neither of us saw that - we both counted his stones on the 2-line as dead. Now he counter-attacks my 5 stones on the left.  I think mishandling this is where I started losing the game.  Black can also easily live by connecting at A. That would also reduce the territory you can make at the bottom. You both seem ignore this.
This move should have been at A. If black answers then the exchange is certainly good for you because you prevent a black connection at B which would make his group a lot stronger. If black doesn't answer you get an opportunity to capture the three stones which would make you much stronger in the lower right.
j4 would have been better here - he ended up getting much closer to the top than I should have allowed  j4 has problems too. See variation for a possible continuation if white plays j4. O1 is still important.
Ok, at this point I was still thinking in terms of killing all of his stones on the bottom, though I realized it would be a bigger job than I'd initially thought.  Was that actually possible here?  At this point it's not possible. If you intent to kill the black group, you should first cut it off from the corner. Perhaps you could have killed the stones if you attacked them from the beginning. You first tried to kill the corner. You cannot expect to kill all black stones.  Your last move was not good. You drive black into your territory and you have to be careful he doesn't get a chance to cut at A.
Anyway, I realized that he could live in the corner and dealt with it, though I really couldn't afford the extra move.  I knew he could connect under at n1 - I should have just played there and let him live in the corner if he wanted to.  Still under the impression that I could kill everything.  If you first played O1 (still a good move) then you could kill the corner.
Black should just connect at N1.
Black should give atari from the other side.
I badly misread this - thought I could stop him from connecting to the top group even if he took h6  As long as black can connect to the corner and live, preventing a connection with the top group is not important.
I guess technically I could have played j8.  By now I was intensely aware of n1, and how much trouble this whole clump would be in if he played there and connected to his stones on the 5 line.  I think my problem in fights like this is consistency - for a couple of moves, I assume his stones are killable and attack like crazy, then I realize mine are in trouble and get overly defensive.  I spend a couple moves trying to escape, then decide to make eyes, then get distracted by something else.  The end result a lot of wasted moves.  What would have been your priorities at this point?  This move makes good shape and is much better than j8. It keeps the marked stones isolated. The only drawback is that black can shut you in at j8 and therefore you have to be careful with your stones in the lower left and make sure they've got enough space to make eyes if necessary.  I still think that the best move would be O1, or if you don't see it, N1. At this point O1 as well as N1 are gote, but if the possibility of a black connection gives you worries for as long as it does and by every move you play you have to think "What if black connects?" then it's worth playing a gote move to solve the problem.
cutting him off like this might not have been a bad idea, but I didn't have a good follow-through.  I should have been trying to connect out or make eyes in the lower left, but I was still hoping to kill him on the bottom, I think.  This is a nice cut, but a little premature because you're not strong enough. You should first play a move like A  N1 is still the best move.
I had planned f3, but suddenly noticed this cut.  Allowing it would probably have meant sacrificing mystones around line 8, which I wasn't willing to do.  I considered f5, but didn't have time to read it out (we're both in byo-yomi now).  I think it would have been better - he would have connected anyway by capturing g3, but it would have cost him a couple of moves.  It's hard to say which is best. I think F3 is best. See variation
new tactics again, trying to nibble away at him from the right
realized it wasn't going to work and tried to escape...  You see what I mean?  I won't bother with a play-by-play of my thought processes for the rest of this.  What I'd really like to hear is your assessment of the board every 5 or 10 moves - how do you decide what's possible to accomplish, how do you make a plan to do it?  I just get overwhelmed in these situations and start thrashing.
Better to run away with your weak stones.
Unnecessary. Black cannot cut there anyway. Better to keep running.
Finally. Good move.
You could capture the black stones in a net with A. See variation.
still trying to kill the o5 group; my profit in the corner would have been decent if I'd managed it.
Didn't notice that this group was in atari; I would have been fine if I'd n4, then captured his p2 lump  Indeed.
I had to play here to save this group  Yes, but I think it's more important to save your group in the lower left.
but now I don't think my stones in the lower left could run out. Could they have made life in the corner?  I didn't think so (though that didn't stop me from trying it later :P).  Anyway, for now I decided to cut my losses and make territory on top.  I don't think your stones in the lower right can live either, but it's not so easy for black to kill them so there's a chance he would have made a mistake. See variation.
I could have been more aggressive - after being too greedy/optimistic on the bottom, I guess I was afraid of getting burned.  You don't need to review the endgame - typical ddk blundering for both of us.  I made up some points, but not enough.  I'm really interested in what happened in the lower left; I lose so many games this way.  Again, your help is much appreciated!   I think the reason for your problems in the lower left is that you thought correctly that your stones were strong, but you didn't realise that the black stones near it made it weaker and weaker until there was trouble.  You played very well in the beginning. Trying to make territory in the middle was not a good idea, but what was worse was that you sort of gave up that idea after nine moves.  It would help if you evaluate the strength of groups more often and see in time that groups are weak or strong to decide whether to attack an enemy  group or stop attacking it or to defend one of your groups or not defend it.  Your gained a lot of points in the endgame. Here your opponent was the one who made the mistakes.
This is a big endgame move.
You could have killed the whole group if you played at A.
You could play A. See variation.
Not necessary.
White can start a more important ko-fight by playing at A. See variation. Unfortunately black has too many big ko-threads in the upper right and I see only two ko-threads for white so it doesn't make a difference.
Alcibaides [21k]: hi, gl Darkynou [20k]: Hi gl and Hf
going here forces your opponent to strengthen himself
Alcibaides [21k]: oops it slipped
this move is bad most of the time simply play
now there is no continuation. your opponent is safe and has sente!
this move does not threaten anything, so don't defend!!
like one of those
here this move for example does not do anything. you were under no threat. So you need to play elsewhere
always avoid playing the empty triangle. it has few liberties and tends to die :)
again much better is something like m15 shapewise, but you don't even need to play there so big moves like the ones I marked are still much better
don't push from behind. get ahead by jumping
playing solid like this is very slow and does not create eyeshape
why defend two stones? they don't do anything. Both white groups are alive so you can easily give up those two stones. look at the alternative I give here.
chance gone the review ends here  to summarize: Do life and death problems. There is a lot on the internet, I advise you to get a book anyways.  Get some book about the basics or read up on basics on the internet. You made a lot of simple mistakes and unneccesary plays. It's best to read a little bit about basic go principles. (In the Beginning is a great book but you might want to look into something like "learn to play go" as it starts off easier and covers more)
Darkynou [20k]: Bad :P
Darkynou [20k]: Bad N 11 :p
Darkynou [20k]: Rah
Alcibaides [21k]: I think they're dead
Darkynou [20k]: It's finish
Djif-Master: Just a note (not important for the actual course of the game): I looked up on gobase.org for professionals using this opening, because I personally think 4 is kind of strange move. Since 2 is going for influence and quick development and 4 in contrast is territory oriented and rather slow to develope from. Now, what do professionals say? Black wins 63 % of the games with this opening. With 4 at A Black wins only 54 %.
Djif-Master: Usually Black is making a shimari in the upper right or left corner, but since White cannot make a good extension from lower left corner D10 looks like a very good move. A for actual play. B for different approach of the top right corner creating moyo on the right side.
Djif-Master: To approach one of Black's corners is good, preventing black from making a shimari. See variation for different approach.
Djif-Master: Banging your head against Black's marked stone usually is not good. But in this case there is a joseki.
Djif-Master: Good! All your moves in the upper right corner were according to joseki, building a thick wall facing the bottom. Black omits A which is usually played to leave options for further development on the top. White can punish that by playing at B (you do so later), enclosing Black in the corner.
Djif-Master: Your last two moves are following the right idea. But K3 should be either at A or B. A is better if you are going for influence and trying to create a moyo. B is better if you want to be prepared fo an invasion around G3. (B also follows the local joseki.) Still K3 is ok.
Djif-Master: Black's 3-3-invasion is premature. Because it is allowing white to create something big on the right side. Playing R9 would probably the best move for Black. A for actual play. B for what makes the difference. With possible continuations of the game and how two make use of the walls.
Correct direction of play?  Perhaps better at R4?  Djif-Master: Wrong direction. R4 definitly is better. The reason is, that you allready have a wall in the upper right facing the bottom.
At this point I have nice thick walls pointing towards the center; but how should I use them?  Djif-Master: Walls usually don't just point towards the center they are pointing to one side of the board. In the upper right the Wall is facing the bottom. In the lower right corner the the wall is facing the left side. There is not su much hope for White to create territory on the right, because there are two holes. The marked Black stone is also a good point from which he can extend increasing is own area while decreasing White's sphere of influence.
Djif-Master: Black's move is, if threated lightly, a nice reduction move either reducing the bottom or the right side. It also is to see as an extension from the two marked stones creating a very loose wall facing the top. A for actual play. B for white's proper answer. C maybe possible too. D shows what happens if White is trying to secure the right side. E shows the difference of high to low approach.
Maybe the high approach is better?  Djif-Master: Yes, the high approach would be better, but what is more important. You did not answer K6! Now really is the time to be a little more "aggressive". I was thinking a lot about White's proper move. I think it should be at A. (See variation.)
Djif-Master: Neither A or B are correct. White should play at C.
Seems like I should maybe have played D16.  I have one variation in the sgf.  Djif-Master: White at A is the proper response. See variation.
This outcome seems bad for me.  Djif-Master: You are right, it is not good for you. You are living very small on the top. Black is building huge moyo with less weaknesses than White's formation on the bottom and right.
Djif-Master: A for actual game. B for how Black can get a far better result.
Djif-Master: Black can press down the top at A (see variation), getting an even larger moyo on the left. White invasion around the E13 area would be just crazy.
Too small?  Maybe at K10?  Djif-Master: Reducing move against Black's moyo is urgent. There is no special reason for playing at K10. A, B or C are more reasonable, because there is the proverb: "Play on the border of two moyos". A is the border of White's top and black's left. B and C are also on the border of Black's moyo. K10 is not at the border.
Djif-Master: White should play at A.
I realized at this point I couldn't let black's moyo be so big, but my invasion/reduction doesn't seem to work too well.  Was it already too late for me?  Is this a good attacking point?  Djif-Master: Black's moyo allready is huge, invasion is to late. White can try invasion at A, maybe he is lucky. B or C would still be the proper points for invading Black's moyo, because this points are on the boarder. If Black answers now at B, what is White going to do? Probably playing C, but then Black is chasing White right into the are where White wanted to make at least some territory.
Maybe better to play C7 or similar and try to kill the black stones?  Djif-Master: Who kills whom is the question! Black can kill the bottom left corner starting with A (see variation).
Is this move too small?  I wanted to make territory on the right side.  Djif-Master: This move is huge, preventing Black from making a 30 points reduction. But this game already is lost, if nothing unexpected happens. Black has about 80 points. White 50 points.
This move really destroys my hope for moyo.  Djif-Master: Even if White gets to play O11, Black's lead is to big.  +No more comments following.+  Go to the end for a summary and my personal advice.
Th
This move doesn't exist and is a mistake.  It is a mistake because it is too slow.
This move seems fine.  It punishes g4 because g4 is really really slow.
I like white.  Black has many stones that don't do anything and f3/d2 don't yet make more than two points.
This move is slack.
You can't treat the bottom group lightly, you've invested 4 stones there next to his weak group.  You can't give that up so easily.
Wow this is so slow.
Wrong placement
This is bad.  Don't ignore a peep to a one space jump.
????  Black passes...
Slow now  that you've made enough space on the side.
Wrong shape.
Interesting, but too fancy.
Too heavy.
Finally :)
This move does nothing, i still say you should link your two bottom groups together or defend the lower left.
Now Black has a nice attack going.
This move is the wrong direction.
Now the attack has stopped.
Very slow.  You're not worried about your top group.
Which is why you should never have let it happened.  You had sente at least twice to take it.
??????
[A]Black connects, and White is left with thin groups. They are not necessarily under immediate danger, but Black can reduce them a lot. Regarding territory: I counted around 60 points for Black, and around the same for White including komi. The advantage that Black has is that he is thicker (White has open skirt at the top and on the left etc). Do you agree?
Well even with this you get at least a seki.
Is this the right spirit? I like this joseki alot. What are some times when I shouldn't use it?  F: You don't see it to often so early in the game, but I wouldn't call it a mistake.
F: The disadvantage is that white is settled and your corner is still open to invasion later on
In retrospect, this seems bad. Thoughts?  F: The white extension is a litte too loose, so invading is possible, but it can wait until later, there are other big points on the board
F: I think you should play on the other side. See variation
F: White should first put more pression on the two black stones on the left. Seer variaion
F: This is not the right idea. After finishing the joseki, the marked white stone is in a ideal position. See var.
F: What about taking the left side
Ok, here things get interesting. Please let me know what you think of the fighting that follows.  F: This seems rather greedy.
F:OK
F: OK
F: Not good, this is much to easy for white. See variations
You separated white, but you still have a cutting point, and white has sente to try saving his stones on the left
F: Better starting from the outside. See var.
L2 is probably much better?
F: You're trying too hard to kill white
F: Compare this result with one of the earlier variations. In both cases, white lives, but here, you have more than 10 point less.
This is probably a bad move. What is better?   F: You should try to attack the white stones in the middle
I'm very bad at three space invasions. Should this one be possible?  F: It should be on Q8 (one to the left), but it should be possible
F: If you invaded at Q8, you could escape to the centre now, but here that's not possible
I'm really running out of time here, so my play becomes a little more haphazard.
F: White should continue fighting on the right side.  If black can take this 3 white stones, the game is over.
I think F5 is better, but I was running out of time.
adamworth [7k]: gg miechan [7k]: thx^^ adamworth [7k]: thanks again :-) adamworth [7k]: wanna review? miechan [7k?]: sorry.. miechan [7k?]: bye^^ adamworth [7k]: byebye  ----------------------  He resigns here, but it is unclear that he is losing at all. If I count correctly, I am ahead by a handful of points. 5 - 10 ish, I'd say, but those could be grabbed in the yose, perhaps?  Thanks again for taking the time to review this game.  F: I count almost 70 pointsfor you and 31 for white, so your lead is much bigger than you thought.
dbstraight [20k]: hi Georgi [19k]: hi
This continuation by white surprised me.  OM: Kogo's online dictionary says this is not joseki. I will post a few moves, you can look up more in Kogo's
I figured this extension would secure some side territory. I know the usual follow-up to a contact play is hane, but neither one seemed good to me here.
I seem to lose the corner, but maintain good control of the side.  OM: this is ok for B I think
OM: I would probably prefer the var
OM: this is surely an overplay by White, now you gain an upper hand
Intending to win either the stones in the corner or the R17 stone.  OM: good!
OM: this is also bad, W gets a very cramped, heavy shape
Again, the hane doesn't seem good. O18 is safe, but seems to allow white to move out toward the center too much.  OM: this is ok. You could also take at R17 and end up with a free corner
White takes the territory I left open.
Not an expected continuation.  OM: White is in trouble, he also makes bad shape (empty triangle)
Gaining a free stone and enlarging my territory slightly.  OM: you could probably gain even more playing N15, after this White may still live, but give you a lot of influence on upper side
It seems white still should've been able to save the corner stones.
With this play, it seems white's group will definitely be able to live, so I'll turn my attention to securing territory.
4th line push is good, right?  OM: I think it is. White gives you free territory
Forcing the capture.  OM: a move like this is to be avoided, it does not gain anything for W, just spends a possible ko-threat.   I'm not even sure you should take it, maybe you can play elsewhere.
And taking it.
OM: a very defensive move by W. Next move can enlarge the lead for B, say A-C. N15 is not bad, but it's playing close to thickness... (where you are already strong)
Keep my position strong on the side.
OM: this is a pushing sequence I see a lot in lower kyu games. However I feel this exchange is better for B
I wasn't sure whether I should continue pushing downward or not. This seemed like a safe play that would allow me to shift my attention elsewhere on the board.  OM: you group on top is super strong! Now is the time to turn to one of these yummy points I've shown earlier. If you'd like to play here, M13 is the spot
Perhaps given my strong side position along the N line, I shouldn't have let white get in there.  OM: this is not joseki but again, I wouldn't say it's a bad mistake. They say push your opponent towards your strength. But Black F16 is probably better, you would build a large framework.
I considered another diagonal at E17, but it seemed it would give away too much (or all) of my potential side territory. I assumed I would lose corner territory here, but keep the side.  OM: this move is not very good. Like I said on the previous comment, push him towards your strength. This means get strong in the corner. I would play either A or B here.
Preventing the cut.
Securing the side territory.  OM: this seems a waste however, to let your strong wall in the center only gain you about 20 points or even less
OM: this move is usually for endgame only, it is small. Also, here it enables a cut (See var)
OM: this is also an endgame move, W is forced to defend, and you lose some opportunities (like the cut I've shown earlier)
OM: better at F 18
The idea was to move into a position to cut off white's main group there from the D15 and D14 stones.  OM: not a bad idea!
And it was blocked.  OM: now B should cut at F15, see var
I thought this was a safe play, but as it turns out, it wasn't. Again, trying to cut off some white stones for capture and/or enlarge my territory.
The unexpected and dangerous cut. F18 was my first thought, but E18 would block that quickly. I also considered D17, but it seemed I should play more toward securing the corner.  OM: As long as you can push out (C14) there's no danger for you! You tend to play a little greedy - you want the secure territory, right away. Instead, you might want to focus on keeping the opponent weak and attacking him. you can gain a lot while attacking!  It's not too late for the cut
With the idea of closing this "eye."  OM: no use, as he connects easily with G15
OM: Wow, he still lets you cut! F15 is very good for Black.
No further attention seemed necessary at the top, nor did it seem possible to capture any of white's stones. This seemed a good way to continue my attack on the corner, but perhaps C4 would've been better... on the other hand, perhaps playing at the other corner or along the bottom side would've been better too. What choice of tenuki should I have made?  OM: this move is standard, R6 would also be good, but you *shouldn't have tenuki'd at all*!
It seemed to me that from this position, I was wrong about my assumption about the lack of attention needed and that white had a good attack up in the corner, but I can't find it (if it exists).
Protecting my stones.
OM: hmm this is not joseki either... Why?
Perhaps the hane at B5?  OM: this is a good move. if we follow the logical continuation, white will get the corner, but you will get groups on  both sides. A "kick" play at C5 is also the one I often see from lower-rated players. It does gain some corner territory, but it strengthens the opponent.
Giving up the corner for influence toward the center.  OM: these are very logical moves (D6 and F4). You might also try C3 right away (Var)
OM: this is a little passive. If White stones around D14 were in good shape, the wall you gain is not very valuable. (Of course we now know that D14 stones are very vulnerable.) Maybe you could play F2 first, lock him into the corner
OM: again, hypothetically, if D14 were strong, I would not play here and play on the bottom instead.
It turns out this development by white leads to problems later.
OM: there is a potential cut at G3, so I would just play H3 here. Is the ladder favorable? (see var on move 80)
Stop white from breaking through the middle there.  OM: you do build an impressive wall, but it lacks side extension...
OM: Yes, this is how W negates a lot of the wall's strength
Could I have played this closer at L3 and still been safe?  O.M.: you are probably too concerned with safety here. The wall is farily strong, with the exception of broken ladder and W's possibel cut at G3. More important question here is: how to make this wall work more efficiently? A move like L4 might be more efficient. Other possibilities are R3 (take away White's corner) and R6 (try to biuld the right side which is still not finished)
OM: W got some profit here
OM: another strange move that makes B safer
OM: but this move should be at G5, protect G3 cut at the same time
The aforementioned problem. With the stone at E4, white killed the potential for a ladder.
I'm assuming either G1 and G2 or F3 and F4 are dead, so I decide to protect the one with some territory behind it. Though perhaps (see variation)...  OM: I would choose the other one. The territory is not that big, and you would build an amazing influence
I'm afraid of the cut I showed in the other line, but it seems I may not have needed to be. Sacrificing stones to protect this cut.
Again, white plays a stone to kill a potential ladder after the cut, and again I'll fall for it.
But this seemed necessary to protect my group on the bottom. Was it?
Trying to reduce the effect of white's cut.
Trying to enlarge my group and gain influence toward the center. I was thinking white might play F7, to attack my group on the left side. It seems this play could definitely been better in regards to extending my group on the bottom, but where?  OM: this seems ok; W cutting stones are weak. I think B should have an upper hand in a fight here
OM: this is ludicrous - your group is rock solid and W cannot gain anything but playing here. you can easily ignore
OM: you see, your possible profit here is limited, it is much better towards center
OM: again, White can do you no harm here
OM: fairly small, F7 was a must
Preventing white from attacking this group.  OM: more importantly, *you* are the attacker here! Do not be so shy!
I thought about F9, but it seemed this would get me the same move for free...
I didn't take into account the fact that I would be in atari.
Protecting my stone. Again, I was expecting white to try to attack and reduce this group, perhaps with F9.
OM: W was wise *not* to play F9, he would have been cut. But you can still cut, right?
K8 instead? OM: surely K8 is better but H9 is even better!
OM: it is very strange that W abandoned his stones and played here... Once gain, this is pretty small endgame move. You should punish him!
A normal pattern, but it turns out to be problematic later.
OM: both these moves are nearly useless
Protect the corner.
Presumably with the idea of cutting if I replied with D19.
This seemed best.
OM: It's hard to see you guys making these moves while the cut is still there!
Keep white out of my side.
OM: omg, the cut!!!!
Now the expected white attack comes.
I truly had no idea how I should respond to this play. Any ideas would be greatly appreciated.
Focusing solely on living.  OM: this is your problem in the latter stages of the game. Go is a two-way game, it's hard to win solely by defending. You should recognize your group here as strong (wall, eyeshape near B7 and A8) and the opponent as weak (H8 group, no base, cuttable). So your strategy here is not "OMG I'm gonna be killed", but "how do I exploit his weakness?".  The cut (H9) is still there! (And the other cut, at F15). So you can play H9 right away and press your attack; or you can play solidly E10 and then kill the intruder stone (see var)
Until white closes off my liberties on the top, he can't invade (or perhaps E7?), so it seemed like a good time to run off and reduce his potential territory.
This may have been premature, but securing life for my group.  OM: not really, the triangled eyes are false
There are probably better follow-ups here to attack white.  OM: sure, H9
The idea is to head toward my group at the top after forcing H9.  OM: it's getting tough for B now
OM: I would say your best chance here is to try and connect with H15; probably H11 is most direct, G12 looks promising too
OM: again, W tenukis at the wrong time
Enlarge my territory, and prevent this white group from influencing the center as strongly.  OM: as do you... A and B are both nice moves
dbstraight [20k]: big storms here, if i disappear, it's a power outage... i promise, i wouldn't run
Protect the side.  OM: S8 is better because it has "monkey jump" followup
OM: seriously, stop playing this move! (I've seen it many times already). Just play S8 and then T6 is your sente.
OM: this ends up gote for you
Georgi [19k]: ok
OM: this is fairly small. The K8 group is still weak, press it
OM: not necessary
Keep the white group out of the center as much as possible and continue extending my territory, though very slightly so.
Seeing as my time is running low, I just made a play that I knew maintained sente and was likely to happen at some point anyway.
OM: W should just ignore
Threatening the kill and reducing white's territory.  OM: was your last chance to play F15
Again, there are probably better reduction plays here.  OM: see var
Helping the top group and moving toward the center.
Enlarging the top group and adding influence to the center.
After the game, my opponent suggested that I may have been able to kill his center group here with a different continuation after his play here. I don't see it though. I think his idea was something like...
Just securing the top territory.  OM: this move is worth only 1 pt
OM: here you could boldly move to O8!
The idea now is just to reduce.
Standard 3-3 invasion to reduce territory. It also seemed like I wouldn't have to run out of time doing it. Does this thing ever fail?  OM: this does not work, not with White walls all around it!
OM: W should just play S2 and kill
OM: see var
White's plays here had me scared, but it still seems I maintained control and that he couldn't stop the invasion.  OM: yes you are alive now
A threat that I ignored, leading to my defeat. I assume J1 was the play to protect it.
The invasion begins.  OM: this is a nice move indeed, but you only lose 9 points here; can always connect at M7
I didn't notice the atari I created for myself here. Would H2 instead have saved the group?  OM: sure. This is painful!
dbstraight [20k]: oops Georgi [19k]: yes  At this point, I know the group is dead.
So I just try to reduce territory some more.
More reduction. Again, I assume there are better reduction plays.  OM: you had a chance here...  End comments.
Would N5 have been ok?
Stopping the reduction of my side territory.
I was a bit afraid of a cut at S16 after this. Is it indeed safe?
More reduction.
I'm going to be forced to do this at some point anyway, and time was on my mind.
I think at this point, I probably could've just passed, but it didn't seem like it would hurt to fill these in, and I didn't have the time left to make sure it was safe to pass.
I don't think white needed to do this, but ok.
I missed this potential territory. It wouldn't have changed the outcome, but I still should've reduced it. Of course, time was again on the mind.
Not ideal  White should approach from the other side
Tking advantage of white's mistake - although maybe O3 would be better
R14 is more usual
f17 would be better
m: is it slow?  YES a reducing move at A or B followed by invading at C would be better
Best preceded by A or B   Fortunately white went the wrong way..  He should have follwed the variation here
m: bad move. but what should I move insteed?  The moves that followed made this move look worse than it really was.  Having started to attack you then shy away from any fighting and white pushes you around  I have added some variations over the next few moves for you to see how it could develop.   None of these is necessarily best play - but they don't seem bad for black
Letting white take this point is bad - since this is the vital point for reducing the shimari
This move looks questionable F3 may be better
Having to drop back like this and let white push through is really passive
Letting white push through is really bad!
Seein as this doesn't connect or make territory it looks bad.  If you are giving up the triangled stones then just push at H4 and make a bit more territory.  If you want to rescue them - then rescue them   But its a bit late now
Letting white capture them like this gives him too much security
Having played G10 you should back it up with a move near  A and H4 is better than K5
m: endgame move...  Well the endgame has started!  - it is not bad - it leaves black open at the bottom and preents the invasion at A
m: ... but I made it sente. Any better move?  Well letting white slide to M1 would be quite big and sente too.  Actually this is already the endgame since both players have played rather conservatively and there has been no real fighting to speak of.  Black could of course slide to T13 instead but seeing black is ahead here then playing conservatively like this should be OK
m: now I think this move is not needed
m: small.  Well white is trying to avoid a fight - as both players have been all along
This is wrong - you play this move when you are weak - here the diagional move is better - see variation
m: is this a solid move, or a slow one?  - slow - but you messed up here earlier anyway  Something like O10 looks better
m: overplay. but what's the best move here at the left side?
Unexpected move by White. Normal moves are around q9. So I decide to bild the wall towards my simari.  [ZD] A looks quite normal (q9 is also possible, but I would not dare to say which one is better).  Answering with B seems a bit dubious to me -- this move is usually used when black already has a stone around C.
[ZD] Leaving the cut at A may turn out problematic later.  At the very least, it will be quite difficult to make any territory around B.
[ZD] A would be better -- with a high move of B, your group will lack a base and it will be easier to attack.
[ZD] A mistake from white, strenghtening your group.  A, leaving a possibility of attack at B, would be better.
This move is too high, so I decide to make an ivasion next move. Is there any others urgent or big moves on board? Will o10 be better?  [ZD] A is definitely a mistake, leaving the weakness at B. It might even be feasible to play at B directly.  Your move at C is also ok. Both of these moves are more urgent than D (which would IMHO be better placed at E), as white still has moves to reduce the right side.
[ZD] You might also fight with A.
[ZD] Playing A now would be easier.
[ZD] A is probably better answer for white.
[ZD] good, white lost a lot here.
When I started to review -- I think it's some kind akward move. It's purpose was to help upper left group and suppress the white simari  [ZD] Your upper left group is very strong now so there is no need to help it.  However, playing in this area is ok, as as white would very much like to get D.  Given that white has choice of A or B, this particular move does not seem good, though.  C looks like a better idea.
[ZD] If you felt that you need to help your upper left group, then playing like this and giving white the wall is inconsistent (also, A now looks quite bad).
[ZD] White should not play these moves just now.
I think it's the best move in this situation -- helps my simari on bottom right and attack the white stone. Is there other possibility?  [ZD] I would consider playing A to protect the cut first.  White B, black C can be expected then.
Should I continue the attack? I thinks that while white will be running for life, I'll build the moyo on bottom. Or may be I should go more close -- r13 or q7?  [ZD] You might consider A (something like the variation) and try to kill (but that is a dangerous plan, not to be attempted unless you are sure you are losing otherwise).  Other than that, I do not see a useful attack on white group just now -- B to build your position in lower right is possible, but white may reduce with C.  R13 is too small, as white has the continuation showed in another variation.  Q7 looks inefficient.
[ZD] This push is a mistake -- white loses a liberty and gains nothing.
I do really don't know how to attack this stone. I don't like p7 because of white q9. Later I discover that q9 isn't very dangerouse for me. What will be the right attacking move for this stone?  [ZD] I would consider ignoring this and killing the white group with C.  B looks natural, and q9 does not really do much.
[ZD] This move is not necessary.
[ZD] This push is a mistake, strenghtening white.
[ZD] A to kill the upper right group would be dangerous now, as you strenghtened the lower right group, making the arising cuts problematic.  So this move is OK.
[ZD] This is overplay, leaving too many cuts. A is better.
Or should I let white go in the center and build the territory at bottom?  [ZD] No, given that there is no way how you could build any territory on bottom.
Was this move a mistake? Because white now have l8 and k7 sente moves, when they block my center group with one eye. But this move helps the m3 stone.  [ZD] Allowing white to cut would be too bad now; since the corner is alive, this move seems reasonable.
I think it's one of my mistakes in this game. I should just connect at s6.  [ZD] Yes, A would be better.
[ZD] Bad shape.  A would be better.
At this move I felt as I completely lost the control over situation.  [ZD] Why? Worst-case, you have enough liberties to capture the white group.  The situation might be getting a bit dangerous for the group A, though.
Was there any other way to survive or run the r10 group, other than in the game?  [ZD] This push strenghtens white and removes one of your liberties.  A mistake.
[ZD] Playing this move now gains nothing, and perhaps you might like to cut the other way later.
[ZD] This wastes a ko threat.
[ZD] Now you are in trouble.
I think that the game was over. At this ko threat I was hoping, that if I have left side, the game will be even. But as I undestand, if white will take the center group -- the game will be over. So should white respond on this ko threat or not?  [ZD] Since white would clearly lead by more than 20 points even if you manged to secure the whole left side, answering this threat is pointless for him.
[ZD] Saving the upper left group is about the best white can do.
[ZD] A is better.
At this move I was completlly exhaust, so just think about how to survive by this group, and find nothing better that b11. Is there other possibilities?  [ZD] It is not completely clear that A works; the fight is complicated.  B looks simpler.
At this move my opponent left.
M: Hi, I'm Mishuu, 4k on KGS. You can ask me for any questions you have on KGS or by mail.  My following comments will start with a "M :"
M: This move looks too tight, to close to the black stones. Black can settle his group easily with A.  I suggest you some variations.
M: Very good move. You keep your stones safe.
Nomadic [11k]: is c 13 a true play when should i pincer like this?  M: C13, or one-space pincer, is the most severe answer to a kakari like C15.   In this case, this is of course a good move which give you the chance to develope the top side.   You can play this kind of pincer when you want to get some profit around the triangle stone, and you are ready to fight.
Nomadic [11k]: was not sure if i should answer c18  M: D18 is certainly big, but be careful. You are protecting an area which is still open to a black invasion (around A). So take the sente and play in a free place.  See variation.
M: W28 is big, but you missed a good cutting point at A. See var.
Nomadic [11k]: what is the best answer lost some points there  M: Seems that M17 is the better way to keep some territory there. See var.  That said, the cut at A is still possible and sente. You could then protect at M17. See var.
M: This is a good extension.
M: B53 is an overplay, here. You could punish him (see var.)
M: This is a small move, you are following black where HE wants to play. Take the initiative. At this stage, Black got the four corners.   An invasion near A may be possible, and even you die, you would lose nothing.
M: You don't have to answer here. You have almost captured two stones (they are in atari), and yours keep 2 liberties, so you are not in a hurry to save your stones. Play wherever you want, or at least around ther corner.  See var.
Nomadic [11k]: i guess this was overplay  M: Not overplay at all. Black made a good wall in the sequence before, and you break almost everything here. Your move is quite close to your stones, and can be useful if black manage to cut at A.
M: Connecting at A would be more solid, and one point better.
M: Once again, you atari on the wrong side. Think about the direction of play, I'm sure you'll find good moves.
M: A was the tesuji.
Goec [11k]: thx
Nomadic [11k]: missed s18 here  M: Yes, you could win the game here. Anyway, S12 is useless, white stones are already secure. The three black stones were totally overplay.
Nomadic [11k]: i was not aware that the difference was so close this is not needed i guess  M: Well let's see
Goec [11k]: ? Nomadic [11k]: trying some points Goec [11k]: )
Since O3 did not put that much pressure on R4, i decided  to tenuki.
Should white simply play R14 here? They are actually pretty similar outcomes; in one white  gives more of the corner, but gives black a better shape. However, R14 might be slightly easier to manipulate.  See  the variations as to why.
I like the result locally, but black has sente now.
This move seems nice. What should white do now? I  thought tenuki might be bad now, so white has to play  something in the corner. My ideas are A or B. Since i'm not familiar with the joseki  variations after A, i played B. Is B the correct move, or is  there a better way for white? Can white dare to attack more with a move around C? B is decent, but A is most likely honte. Though C at first glance seems pretty good, it is actually a  poor move.  It places very little pressure on black's stone  and can easily be isolated.
Now the corner is mostly enclosed and R8 became quite  strong. I decided to split black immediately. A very good idea.  I would do the same.
I like this result for white. Now black has two weak groups  and the thickness in the upper right is useful. Is this hane the correct move?  It is a very good move, but I think I see a tesuji here; see  the variation.
This might be a little to critical, but here is a point that  most kyu level amateurs play; it is good, but it leaves a  weakness at A and B (A in this case). It is acceptable in some cases, but here it doesn't work,  so white should have played at A instead of at the marked  stone, since the resulting variations would be similar.
Is this move the wrong direction? Is A better for white? Or  is B mandatory? A is better for white.  You've probably heard never to let  your opponent form a double wing.  Black playing A would  let him. B is a lot bigger than it looks.  If black gets to play  there before you do (provided you don't approach his  bottom-right stone, it's very big).  If he ignored it, you could  cap his group and attack both his group and his stone in  the corner, like in the variation.
I thought it might be a good time to invade now. Is there a  better spot to invade? Maybe A instead? A seems worse than the situation that occurred here.  Ithink instead B would work pretty well
Is this the correct shape for white?
This move better at A? I don't like the result here. Is there a way to live in sente? A and this move are equal; this might be a tad, tad  better in case a ko occurs here, then black has one less  local threat. I don't think there's a way to live in sente.
A better? This move seems better than A, a cap would be less  effective (for black) now.
Is this the correct shape? The variation white A, black B, white C, black D, white E  is better.
I think the ponnuki is very good for white. Now the  influence of N16 is not very useful, and white has perfect  access to the center area. Exactly! Good insight!
I think this move is bad for white. White should tenuki  instead, right? How about white A?
Is this move good for black? After black fixes at A, white  lost the possibility to play A herself.
I played here because i thought this stone will help later  for a white move at R9.
I played here to give white a way to connect.
What should white answer now?
I misread the following tsumego. R9 is probably a very bad  move.  Well, it's not so much the initial move as the few important  moves you missed.
A is better; if black doesn't play B, white can.
Playing A here is better, since  this move cannot  connnect to the marked stone with just one more move. Black has to play B, and white can then play C to cause  trouble for black.
Black lives in sente. This cannot be good for white :(
I played here for time reasons.
This is probably a bad move, because it just helps black.
I do not like this move. White cannot expect much center  territory because of O15 and L8. Is there a better way for  white?  Well, I think going for that territory is suicide (literally in this  case :(     Instead, how about this?
I played here because i thought that capturing the N6  stone makes black half-dead, so that white can play  sente moves to make solid territory in the center. This actually happend, but the H4 stones became too  weak in the process.
This is the result i hoped for. But i do not like this white  move because 1) it is probably better to play at A 2) H4 is going to die :-(
Solid points, but white is dying :(
I did not expect this move. I was surprised and i was  going to resign soon.
I think black could have killed easily with A.  Yeah, you got off lucky
I was relieved here.
I counted me behind for some reason, so i was going to  start a ko. There was not much time to think (byo yomi),  so i messed up terribly.  If you count, you realize here you were actually up 15+  moku.
This is probably the worst threat i ever played.  lol; ive played worse :)
The game ended here, black won by time. Thank you again for reviewing this game!  It was fun, so I don't mind at all.  Your play is very well tempered and sound.  The only  think you might want to improve on iis finding tesujis.  If  you would want to, I suggest going to goproblems.com  and working through graduallly harder tesuji problems.   They really help with analyzation.
Imagist: Would this be better at A?  [Frank] Ive seen this played both ways.  Your move is the joseki move.  The idea is to pressure the F15 stones as that is where the action is at the moment.  Though playing at C14 might feel like it's protecting your corner, the reason it's not the book's joseki is probably because its too passive here..
[Frank] Black's aim here is clear - he wants to expand the top right.  I think this is a bit of an overplay...  See the variation.
Imagist: Here I considered A, B, and C (C aims at D).  What is your suggestion?  [Frank] How about E17?
Imagist: Better at A?  I chose this direction to keep the triangled stones from coming under attack, but it ends in gote.
Imagist: Too slow?  [Frank] Probably..  C14 was slow too...There is no danger for either group there.  There are a number of bigger points here.  You can kakari here or play the star point at K4 or Q10.
[Frank] Perhaps it is too early to attack.  If you attack him now, you can't really gain anything i think..it will be hard to use a wall around the H line especially if he ends up getting R14 or so.
Imagist: I am pretty sure that this is better at A.  [Frank] I think I still prefer a kakari from the other side.  The reason is that, what if B decides to play Q14 or so?
Imagist: I played this move with sacrifice to take the corner in mind, but I didn't get as large a corner as I had expected.  What would have been better here?
Imagist: Is white thick enough to attack like this?  Black's thick marked stones worried me a bit here.  [Frank] What are you trying to gain by attacking here?  It is important to have a plan when you are attacking a group.  I don't think there is so much to gain here by attacking.  Perhaps you should just kakari D4.
[Frank] It is quite difficult to attack B here because W is quite thin all around.
Imagist: Mistake here.
Imagist: I had thought when I played H14 that white could play A here.
Imagist: Wasted ko threats here.
Imagist: I wasn't sure of what to do here, so I played this to attempt an attack on black's cutting stones, but this doesn't seem particularly good.  What could I do here?
Imagist: Seems like a mistake.
Imagist: Too deep?  I was behind and desparate.  [Frank] I don't mind it so much.  Seems B got greedy and paid for it.
Imagist: I think this was a mistake, as it doesn't make life for black on the side.
Imagist: Is this okay?
Black: Top left: 14 Bottom right: 3 Top right: 61 TOTAL: 84  White: Bottom left: 78 Bottom right: 4 Center right: 3 Komi: 6.5 TOTAL: 93.5  Imagist: Here I estimated that I held a comfortable lead and I didn't need to kill black M6, so I prioritized keeping my groups on the bottom right and center right alive.  The count to the left shows that my estimation was okay (it's hard to estimate the score in 30 seconds byo-yomi!)
Imagist: I think this is a mistake, just giving me stones.
Imagist: This is the game-losing mistake.  I missed the squeeze combination starting at A that allows black to capture the cutting stones.  If white plays A, white has the game in hand.  Here was where I felt under time pressure the most; who knows if I would have seen that A was necessary if I had more time?
Imagist: Better at A, so black risks less in the ko.
Imagist: My opponent sees the squeeze that I missed.
Imagist: Wrong.
Imagist: The next few moves waste ko threats.
Imagist: I had missed this 1 point move previously.
Cook777: I have a lot of trouble with this kinds of openings. I usily play in a way to provent it in most games by playing E16 or E17 before taking the other courner.  z -- I like to play into things that I have trouble with.  It helps me learn.
z -- 15 is not good.  Black should play at A instead.
z -- I also think 16 at A would be better.  16 as played is biased towards the right, where black is already strong.
z -- this is why.
z -- 19 leaves a weakness at A ...
z -- ... which 20 does not exploit.  See variation.
z -- 29 should protect the cut by playing at A.  This is basics, cutting and connecting.
z -- 30 should be at A.  White peeped, black ignored; go ahead and cut!
z -- 31 must be at A. More basics of cutting and connecting.
z -- this result is much better for white.
z -- 35 must be at A.  Black must stay connected.
z -- 36 must be at A.
z -- if white wants to help this group, pushing and cutting at A is better as previously shown.  Maybe white thought 38 is sente, but it isn't.
z -- black does not need to protect here.
z -- white should probably play A instead.  This 46 doesn't really get out.
z -- it looks like white should get captured now.
z -- but 61 doesn't work.  I would play A.
z -- this capture makes black very strong in the center.
z -- 68 is a wasted move.  White is already connected.
z -- 70 is too close to white's thickness to be effective.  Perhaps white should think about playing at A.  Look at the difference between a white stone there and a black one.
z -- 82 is very bad.  It attacks nothing, defends nothing, and is gote - basically another wasted move.  I like A, but any of the marked points would be better than 82.
z-- good
z -- good
z -- but 92 lets black off the hook.  It should be at A.
z -- very good.
z -- black has the lead now and should win.  White needed to reduce the top left area sooner.
z -- black needs to be careful here.
z -- saving one stone isn't important.  Black needs to stay connected .  107 at A is one way that is safer.
z -- hmm, could white kill black with 114 at A?
z -- I estimate black ahead by about 10 points now.  White could still catch up with a good endgame.  Since you asked about that specifically, I will do my best to comment on it.  However the endgame is very technical and I cannot claim to know the best move.  The best I can hope for is that the moves I suggest are better than the ones played - but not necessarily the best moves on the board.
z -- 122 is small and gote.  See next move for bigger places.
z -- 123 is also small and gote.  Several bigger moves are marked.  I like A best.
z -- White should ignore 123.  Again, I think A is biggest.
z -- not needed.  This is the same as a pass.
z -- good
z -- 127 at A is the correct response.
z -- small and gote again.  Should be at A.
z -- this is not bad, but I still think A is bigger.
z -- still A.
z -- finally :)
stupid move which eventually lost me the center, it was too much trying to keep this alive and protect area on both sides  I agree. Maybe you are thinking that you can really kill this w group. That is very unlikely. W's decision to invade your moyo at this point in the game is not one I would have made, but he certainly can live. You can get compensation for the loss of what might have been your territory by harassing w while building territory on either side. This move sort of harasses w, but does nothing for you except give you a a weak group. Better moves are something like A,B, or C or just play elsewhere like D or E as examples.
Now that you are going down the road of trying to save your group, you should at least play A. You need to get some liberties for your stones and get out into the center to survive. W is strong here and your are weak. Your move acts like you are still trying to enclose w and that is not going to happen. You end up having 2 weak groups.
Now you have invested a lot of stones in the triangle group, but it is really weak. The game move is a nice big one, if you didn't have a weak group to worry about.  Something A or B is needed to try to save your group, but it is already late.
This "leaning" move helps w kill your group.
Both of your corners are strong so I would extend farther from them. Say A or B or something similar.
I think that might have been better playing at the bottom before your triangle stones, but having played them, you want to extend to A or B to make them work. If w plays at A or B, they will be weak.  Your game move is too close to w's strong corner stones. W could try to pincer you with C,D, or E. Also you feel a need to answer w's next move in a way that you would not if you were farther away.
A would be better. 3 stones in row is strong enough when they are pointing into your territory like this. Nontheless, w has not played the best. You have a lot of territory at the bottom and his recent;ly played lin of stones is of little use unless he seriously attacks your triangle stones.
W gets a very big point. He build territory for himself while putting pressure on your triangle stones.
This is not a bad move in many situations similar to this, but I would have played at A to attack the triangle stones while strenghtneing the square stone.
Good move!
Here is a delicate thing. You might be better off playing at A. This move will threaten to connect to your weak triangle stone. Even if this connection does not succeed, this stone is stronger than the triangle stone and you won't have to worry about it as much while you try to reduce w's territory. Your game play gives you a "heavy" group of stones like you had on the right side.
A might be better. It is really obvious what w is going to play.
This is just plain wrong! You have invested a lot of stones and are fighting an uphill battle for their very life. Now you play a move on the wrong side that w does not have to answer. Even if he did answer it, it would not help you.
if i would have played anything else than E14 it would have been very hard to keep the group alive, or at least it was the only solution i saw in the game, even so, white let black stay alive.  Yes
A kills.
not right? maybe work the lower board toward this group for a rescue try, at least it would have reduced whites territory more, I'm sure theres a way for these stones to get out.  I am not so sure. They are really weak. They are imbedded in w stones and  facing w stones and have few liberties. To connect to the nearest b group is a real reach and that group is not real strong. The only bright spot is that w's separating group does not have 2 eyes.
A leaves w with 1 eye, but your weak group is too small.
I'm not sure if black could have gotten further in here.  Not really, w is strong here.
pointless, could have saved for later.  Yes
should have left this for later  Yes only good as a ko threat.
not needed
also pointless, could maybe have played something else before this  Yes
should be A13  This move is better than you think, at least given w's bad reply.
This should be at A or B.
A kills w! See alternate line.
This is going nowhere. You can't win this ko no matter what. W has 2 eyes and you can't make any.
Kalle: I think it would be really important to prevent a white extension on the left side, but the timing is important too. The upper side seems now more important.
maybe playing r10 would be better? expecting something like this to happen  Kalle: White is just trying to get himself into trouble by creating two weak groups. You should strike between the white forces by playing P13! The most important thing is to keep the white stones separated. See my variation for a possible continuation.
Kalle: This move is bad because it helps white to seal you in. You should not give white the nice move of q12, which he takes next.
Kalle: This is the right move, but you could have played it two moves earlier and get better shape for yourself and a worse shape for your opponent.
Kalle: White is forcing black to separate the white groups, which is a bad strategy for white. But it is difficult to find good moves now that white has made two weak groups in the same part of the board. Black should take full advantage of the situation.
Kalle: This is the obvious point. Now white has a hard time handling his stones.
i think i should have played l12 puts more pressure on black
Kalle: This move is defensive and it's an endgame move really. The action is now in the center and the right side, where the two white groups are vulnerable to attack. Playing p18 at this point is almost like passing a turn. You lost a lot of points here.
Kalle: White takes the vital point.
Kalle: Here it is worth noticing that you have a connection at the point A.
Kalle: This is a "thank you" move, white gets to fix his weakness for free, and black gains nothing from this move. You could try to atari at M13 instead, I guess you'll get to eat the stone in sente. Maybe you could have cut the white forces by playing at M13 a little earlier.
Kalle: Here you have to choose whether to connect at A or B. I think there's no reason to give away the stone at R13, because the corner is safe and the black stones on the outside can take care of themselves, and anyway white has to cut in gote if he wants to. So you can play at A.
Kalle: The nasty thing here is that the white group is now absolutely secure and black's corner got smaller.
Kalle: The last few moves gave black influence facing the left side, he would like to play there first after this.
Kalle: White made a mistake here. He has to defend unless he wants to give up the stones he just played on the board. But the stone A is not that important anymore, you could play somewhere else now, to take a big point, B for example.
do u think  q3 is better?  Kalle: The stone A was deep, but it's difficult to know what to do. I think the most important thing is to get sente to play on the left side.
Kalle: The marked stones aren't very useful, but since you're connected at A you could now tenuki and take a big point on the left side instead of playing N4.
Kalle: This stone is a bit overconcentrated and it's gote, which is relly bad because white gets to play first on the left side.
Kalle: This move is not a good shape. I think you should play B15.
should i have taken the corner?  Kalle: I think it's good to try to be active on the left side and give up the corner. The fact is that once white has played C6, you have to give him something, there's not much you can do about it.
Kalle: Here you could play A for example, since you cannot be cut and you have the connection at N18.
Kalle: I guess this peep is ok.
Kalle: I think this white move is an overplay. You can just cut it.
Kalle: You could also play A.
Kalle: You can play A.
Kalle: This is bad shape. You could have played it earlier, but now you can jump to the second line if you want to.
Kalle: This move is gote and you should not play it because you can't kill the white group. For example A and B are very big points.
Kalle: The shape point here is O18. It threatens to cut and prevents white from making an eye here at the edge while making your corner bigger and more secure. You should take it first and then play the other moves.
Kalle: You should play at A instead. It takes one point away from white (from point B) and makes your shape stronger.
Kalle: White can play this now because you didn't play O18 earlier.
Kalle: That was a two-point sente sequence for white, worth actually about four points, because white can continue elsewhere and take some more points. Considering this, you might have won the game just by playing O18 in time. Now white also has the option of making an eye on the upper side by playing at N17.
Kalle: It's a pity that white gets this point as well.
Kalle: Here you should definitely just play B8 (marked A). After B8 you can hane in sente upwards, threatening to connect to your stone at C11.
Kalle: This is a nice move, but it would be more effective on the other side of the corner (point A), because it threatens the white territory there. Here white doesn't really have any territory.
Kalle: This is not the best possible shape. This move can be played so that it defends simultaneously against potential intrusion from the upper side and the left side. The point A would do this.
Kalle: Now white is threatening to connect underneath by playing B8 and you should prevent it because it is pretty big in itself and there is the bonus of being able to play A9 (marked B) in sente after you have taken the point A to yourself first. The value of the point A could now be as much as ten points.
Kalle: This should be at S8 (marked A), so that you get an eye on the edge. This is important because you don't want to get into a shortage of liberties.
Kalle: This way white took away all of your points on the edge and got the point T5 for free at the same time.
Kalle: This is a big gain for white.
!! K
Kalle: I think you should play E1 instead of this move, because it is sente as well, and it is more valuable since it secures your lower side in sente.
Kalle: You could jump in further.
Kalle: This sequence shows why the marked stone should be at A. White got the reduction in sente.
Kalle: Now white gets this in sente too, which is a four point loss again.
Kalle: In general, you shouldn't play moves like this, but save them as ko-threats. You can just play Q11 straight away if you want to.
[tengensan]: I don't know how far you know about Go, so I may say some basic concepts, but I prefer repeating them than let something escape...   The 4-4, Hoshi, usually is played for a fast play and for influence, with "fast" I want to say "build something with less stones".
[tengensan]: The game is simetric... If you had played at D16 or Q4, Black could have played a diagonal fuseki, that leads to a fight game.
[tengensan]: Black's formation is know as Nin-ren-Sei Fuseki.
[tengensan]: Ok. I don't know why you played O17. I am not saying that this is bad, but it is difficult. I try it sometimes, and it makes the game difficult.    There are 2 rules that, hum... let's say... "make the game easier":  1) Start playing in the corners, sides and then in the center. This has a reason. It takes less moves to survive in the corner than in the side, less to survive in the side than in the center. When you make a group alive, it becomes strong and it helps you a lot during the game, it suports you. (if you like RPG, you can associate the alive groups with White Mages from Final Fantasy... ^_^ ).  2) Make the stones help each other. I don't remember if I read it in the collection "In the Beginning" or in "Opening Theory Made Easy" from Otake Hideo. Please, see the variation, I will show you what I wanted to say.
[tengensan]: Q13 is not a joseki. I played this a lot, but I never found it in a joseki book or site...
[tengensan]: I prefer R17 because White in R17 is so good...
[tengensan]: As I said, White R17 is very good. It is sente, if Black ignores (tenuki), White will invade in the right side and Q16 and Q13 will seem useless.
[tengensan]: I learned a advice to where extend from a wall. You have to count the high of the wall, in this case, 1 (T16), 2 (S16), 3 (R16), 4 (Q16). Than you extend in the side in a distance equal to the wall's high (in the third or the fourth line).    So the ideal place for Q13 should be Q12 or R12, this means that Q13 is near from the Black's wall, this make this group heavy (it is taking less points than it could take). Maybe because of this Q13 is not joseki (I am guessing).
[tengensan]: Usually, the first moves are on the third or fourth line. Moves on the first and second line usually are played in the final because they earn less points.   Instead of M18, I prefer some move on the upper left corner or S17 to strenght your group, but, as I said, take a empty corner is usually a big move.
[tengensan]: See, now you are under pressure. =(
[tengensan]: They call this "crawling in the second line"... you had to do this to help M18, but avoid this sequence because you get few points...
[tengensan]: Notice that the Black's stones aren't making territory, but they are doing a lot of influence in the center. It's difficult to explain what is influence, but it helps you in future fights or can be converted in territory, it is like an investiment.
[tengensan]: Good, taking an empty corner is a big move. I think that Black is a little ahead because he has more influence and your stones in the upper right side is a little low, but you can catch up.
[tengensan]: This leave a strong cut point at K17, so it's better to play K17. Playing on the right side or a kakari in F3 is good too.
[tengensan]: You protected the White marked stones, but this gives the chance for Black to strength his group. Your headache in this part of the board started with M18, notice that you had to play many stones to help M18, but these moves are helping Black even more... u.u
[tengensan]: K17 or K16 gives a better shape for Black.
[tengensan]: Again. Playing in the second line in the beginning will help you opponent. The problem with this move (the lower moves) are: 1) Your stone can't surround many points, so it is inefficient. 2) Usually, the players build two walls, one get a wall facing the edge and the other a wall face all the board... The wall that is in direction of the center is better because it can influence and help the other groups during the game.
[tengensan]: C16 is a joseki, but is not a commom move... at least, I don't see this very often
[tengensan]: I liked your choice, you give him the corner, but took influence for the outside, this can help you to balance the game against Black's influence. See variant.
[tengensan]: Now, the position is equal to a 3-3 invasion.
[tengensan]: Good. B14 is possible too (see variant), but in this case, I prefer C14 because I think that you need power to fight against Black's influence.
[tengensan]: Now is Black that is crawling in the second line...
[tengensan]: I prefer C13 because it forces Black to stay in the second line. In this shape, try to avoid Black C13 because it usually gives headache for White.
[tengensan]: You left some dangerous cut points that I marked with X. Even if Black attack, you can manage it, but it is better to avoid this.    But your move O3 is very good, so it compensates the cutting points.
[tengensan]: I prefer O4 to get more influence, see variant.
[tengensan]: I think that Q4 and R7 makes O3 a little weak, so you could help O3 with a stone near it, like K4 or L4. Your move is good too, but between the left side and the lower side, I prefer the lower side.
[tengensan]: Very good. If you forced Black to run for the rigth, O3 could become weak.
[tengensan]: I prefer E4 because it confines Black in the corner and spread influence over the board, see variant.
[tengensan]: The same sequence of the upper left corner...
[tengensan]: Again, Black G3 is a good move, so it is good for you playing at G3 too. Remember, a good point for you opponent is a good point for you too. Playin at G3 would give you a huge influence on the left side.   Q3 is not bad, but you can give more influence for Black. Sometimes it is ok, but in this case I am thinking: "how will White reduce Black's moyo?"...
[tengensan]: I prefer P4, see variant.
[tengensan]: P4 is other choice again, see variant...
[tengensan]: This move hurts White a lot, it destroy your influence on the left side and in the lower side.
[tengensan]: Good, you reduced your loss in this area... Now, an invasion around R10 seems a good next move.
[tengensan]: I think that Black Q10 is bigger, J2 is on the second line and it helps you to close your territory.
[tengensan]: Your feeling was good "I have to reduce Black", but a Black hane at K4 can hurt White a lote. And S9 in the second line is much low.
[tengensan]: Good, other choice should be Q9, after it you could do a monkey jump (suberi) on the upper or on the lower side.
[tengensan]: Perfect, your sequence was very good.
[tengensan]: I thought about Q8 to explore the cutting point at R6, but your move at S11 is better because you make a base for your group, good choice.
[tengensan]: I prefer Q10 because it helps you to run to the center, see variant.
[tengensan]: I believe that Q9 is better because it helps you to run for the center. I am not sure, but your group is almost dead.
[tengensan]: See the variant, I think that Black Q9 kill White's group or at least, lets Black  with a good position...
[tengensan]: In these cases, is better run to the center, now Black can enclosure White and almost can kill it.
[tengensan]: See variant. R12 is the only Black's weakness that don't let him to kill White. P9 is a good move, it doesn't kill White, just threath, but it helps Black to increase  his influence and put a pressure to White group.
[tengensan]: I prefer Q11 to block White.
[tengensan]: Now White is alive, but still has to reduce the Black's upper side.
[tengensan]: I prefer P10, since it is stronger and closes White more.
[tengensan]: White is alive because he can play Q10 or Q8 to live (this is called miai), so I think that a move like O16 or K4 is bigger
[tengensan]: Rsrsrs... As you can guess, I am suspect to talk about K10. Well, but I think that Tengen is good to reduce the influence of your opponent. Since Tengen is in the center, it can run to everywhere to live. Maybe, instead of Tengen, you could have played more inside of your opponent moyo.
[tengensan]: Black is trying to defend his moyo, but sometimes an attack value more points than a defence (you should always analise it: "which is bigger, defending here or attacking there?). I see to big point for Black to attack, M3 and C13, both of them can hurt White a lot.     Other reason because I don't like M12 is that this moyo is open to an attack at O16. Usually, when your moyo is open to two attacks, defending is not the best option.
[tengensan]: Your move is good, but I believe that defending at C13 or K4 may be bigger.
[tengensan]: Black started playing very passive...
[tengensan]: ... because of it, you made a big moyo... but Black can try to fix this mistakes exploring the cutting points of your upper right group.
[tengensan]: Good, but I prefer C13, see variant...
[tengensan]: This marked shape is the so called and blamed "empty triangle"... try to avoid it like the demon runs from a cross... ^_^ Sometimes you don't have choice and has to play the empty triangle, but this should be your last choice...   In this case, E17 is or F16 is better... I prefer F16 since it defends the cutting point at G16...
[tengensan]: F16 is good, it stoles your eye at E17. Always try to do this kind of move, even if you can't kill any group with it, but these moves usually are sente and make your opponent's groups heavy and weak.
[tengensan]: Nice peep... =)
[tengensan]: I prefer F15 aiming to G16... see the variant... it leads to a complicate fight, but I believe that black has advantage...
[tengensan]: It seems that you decided to sacrifice your upper right group... I think that you could have save it earlier, with F16 instead of the empty triangle... But notice that D13  is a dangerous cutting point... maybe shoud be better to play at D13 or E12 if you choose to sacrifice and defend the left side...
[tengensan]: I think that Black D13 is bigger, now Black lets you fix the weakness of your group...
[tengensan]: So you didn't decide to sacrifice, rsrsrs.... ^__^     Ok, but your group doesn't have room to live...let's remember the 3 ways to live a group... you know them, but it is good to feel it in your bones (and maybe there is someone reading this review that didn't realise it yet). So, a group lives when: 1) It has room to make two eyes; 2) It can connect to a alived group; 3) It can kill an opponent group around and, with it, make two eyes or connect to a safe group...     Knowing this, you notice the 3 rules of an assassin *: 1) Steal the base of your opponents group, reduce the space that would let him make two eyes, when reducing, try to induce him to make the death shapes (six rabbit and so on...); 2) You can't attack with weak groups, if so, your weak groups will ending be attacked, die, and you won't kill your opponent group. 3) After 1 and 2, don't let your opponent connect to a alive group, surrond it in a direction that will be more difficult do live.     * "somehow, it remembers me of the anime Soul Eater... the three rules of an assassin that the character Black Star always says..." ^__^
[tengensan]: Good, Black didn't cut, because the White group is already surrounded.
[tengensan]: No, it seems that you still has hope to kill this Black group, but, as I said, you can't kill a group with weak groups (even Sai can't do this, rsrsrs... ^.^ ).    See variant...
[tengensan]: Now, Black can kill even more.... =O
[tengensan]: I prefer H12... in this cases, it is better to sacrifice or you will lose even more... =(
[tengensan]: Since White has many weakness and cutting points, Black could have went a little longer with his attack, see variant...
[tengensan]: As I did in the variant... but G16 was wasted, since Black could have used it to kill bigger... ;D
[tengensan]: Good.
[tengensan]: Black can use F11 to attack you somehow... because of G3, F11 is "playable"... but I didn't like this move... I prefer G4
[tengensan]: I prefer J10, sacrificing two stone, but becoming stronger... see variant.
[tengensan]: I prefer J10 and them G4 to defend your moyo... =)
[tengensan]: Good, you still have some weakness, but you can manage it... =)
[tengensan]: Oh... it was a pitty... C12 could help you... It was difficult to see this attack... it was really a pitty... see variant about C12...
[tengensan]: Let's try to learn something with this mistake... try to see yours mistakes as opportunities to lear something, in Go as in your life... ;D   Usually, this kind of attack starts with the marked shaped "x", the same as the blamed empty triangle...   Notice other thing... your two groups had 2 liberties, even when you connect at D13, it makes one group with... 2 liberties!!! See? So, conecting doesn't help...    When you notice this "even connecting here, the number of liberties doesn't increase", you will have seen a weakness, keep this in your mind.
[tengensan]: almost... but Black can escape with ataris... u.u
[tengensan]: Be carefull, you was fighting and suddenly you stopped. This gives Black the opportunity to take an advantage in this fight. Try to stop fighting just when you were sure that your groups are safe.  I put the number of the group's liberties to help you see the strength of the groups...
[tengensan]: Black's move is more safety... I like E9, but it is more complicated and I am not sure if it works... see variant
[tengensan]: Black connected, but White got many point at the left side, now White has to try to live as many groups as he can.
[tengensan]: M4 is almost like a peep, instead of K4, I think that White M4 could be better because you would avoid this Black M4.
[tengensan]: I prefer L5, a kosumi... the keima L6 is not very good to connect... I will show you this in the next moves... =)
[tengensan]: Now, see variant about keima weakness...
[tengensan]: L8 is bigger, since it saves your whole center group... =O
[tengensan]: This move can help you to make two eyes in the center, but connecting is more fast and safe... =)
[tengensan]: Black could have cutted at K6, but even so, white lives...
[tengensan]: It almost worked... ^_^
[tengensan]: good.
[tengensan]: You should have played B4 here... =O
[tengensan]: Here, you have many choices, like B4 (big), O10, T12 and J1 (sente) or T17 too... =)
[tengensan]: O10 is bigger, see variant... =)
[tengensan]: Black already has two eyes... so you just lost one stone and lost the opportunity to capture one black stone.
[tengensan]: Very good! =D
[tengensan]: A good attack... see, your groups had 3 liberties only... when these few liberties are together with dangerous cutting points, usually these kind of attacks turn possible. =(
[tengensan]: See variant...
[tengensan]: A little risky, but you don't have many options... =(
[tengensan]: I believe that Black should play C8 before...
[tengensan]: Black didn't see B7, that is very dangerous for White, see variant...
bblunder4 [-]: Klaus Petri 2D (w)-Thomas Derz 3d (s)
reid: Let's start by discussing these first six moves by white:  D17 declares white's intention to empasize the top edge.  Then white's second move (D5) declares that white wants to focus on the left side.  White's third move (C13) agrees with the second move, but then white's fourth move (C18) should be at C16.  C18 again puts white's emphasis on the top side, as does G17.  Now C10 is back to the left edge again.  White seems to want it all, which doesn't work very well in go.  Here, it is not reasonable to expect to be able to take both sides and keep the black stones weak.
reid: but with this move, black is trying too hard.  Rmember this: "when you touch me, you help me".  Here, black plays in contact with the weak white stone.  The natural result should be that black helps the weak stones get stronger.  That's not what black wants in this area.  Better to keep his distance with A (J17) if black wants to pincer (which seems natural since white probably should have played C10 at K17).
reid: when white plays the tiger's mouth (hanging connection) at F16, he can expect black to peep at G15.  So the question white must consider is: does G15 help black more or less than F16 helps white?  Or, if we compare this board position with the position if we remove G15 and F16, which position does white prefer?  It looks to me like white would be better off simply connecting at G16 instead of making the F16 tiger's mouth.
I am not sure about the start: the Ponuki makes an interesting shape with the Q16 stone, but maybe Q16 should be at R16 now. (B is a litte overconcentrated+corner is not save jet.) D18 might be a nice way to attack b later. In the game I was unhappy but now I think it is ok.  reid: I have to agree with your game assessment: I think it's too early to take these two stones.  The two black stones are smaller than the one white stone (at L18).  White has played 12 stones here.  If he plays one more gote move at D18, he'll get 10 to twelve points here.  Looking at black's 13 stones plus one gote move at E18, he gets ten points in the corner plus however much he can get from the L16 stones.  Even without Q16 I would count the L16 group at about another ten points.  Black's stones are almost twice as efficient as white's.
reid: black builds a formidable moyo!
reid: This is joseki of course, but in this game, white is already behind and he can't really afford to drift along.  Black is very happy with this result.  Perhaps white should try A instead of R3 - see variation.
reid: This is not a very good invasion point when black has Q10 in place (it's OK if black is at Q9 instead because then white can still extend comfortably to R11).
reid: Oops, black is too gentle!  When black has Q10, the usual idea is to 'kick' the white stone with A (R15).  This is an exception to the "you touch me, you help me" rule.  See variation.
I thought this to be light, but it is just bad I guess.  reid: The meaning of 'light' is that you are prepared to give up parts of your group.  This move is somewhat light, but the subsequent play connected all your stones into a single heavy group.
reid: black seems willing to settle for just the one R14 stone.  I'd say that's an offer white should seriously consider.  If I were black, I'd probably attack both stones together with a cap at M13.  I wouldn't expect to kill them, but black would gain overwhelming strength while securing a good amount of territory,  A sure-win formula.
reid: Hmm, white wants everything again :-)  It is not going to be easy to live with that powerful black wall at R16 and black stones already established at Q13, Q10, and towards the lower right corner.  To continue the 'light' theme of the previous move, white should consider moves like A or perhaps B.  White wants to force black to capture the R14 stone while he builds up some strength to combat the black stones already in this area.  But it's going to be an uphill battle no matter what.  Black has a large numerical superiority of forces in this area,
reid: If black wants to get more 'squirm' factor from this position, he should pull back to A.  Now white can't connect to O13 and he has no choice but to try to live along the edge.  Again, black builds massive thickness and secures territory in the process.
reid: White connects, so it's not great for black, but white is also very heavy, so he's not too happy either.
reid: Ouch.  This is not an effective way for black to use his superiority here.  It is rarely a good idea to simply take territory in gote (unless we're talking about 20 or more points with a single move).  Here, black expands his corner territory by about 4 to six points in gote.  Again, better to cap at A and keep white struggling.  While white squirms, black gets free moves.  Gaining one point from a free (sente) move is much more effective than gaining 5 points with a gote move.
b blundered here.  reid: Indeed!  With his last five moves (starting with O15) black has squandered the huge advantage he acquired.  He just let white back into the game.  Black would lose less if he played M12 at N12 to peep.  After white connects, black extends to M12 to cut off M10.  Or he could play M11 and N11 to cut off M10.  But really black should just keep white struggling by capping him with M13 instead of O15.  Black could expect white to help him solidify the right -side territory as he runs.
reid: So now we can see that the white stone at L10 is a wasted move.  Better to just take two stones instead of L10.  bblunder4 [-]: wo er Recht hat , hat er Recht. Sorry! Pinguschaf [-]: lol und redet weiter^^ tupelo [3d?]: elche sind keine partylöwen, oder?
Pinguschaf [-]: ich bin auf jeden fall ein stubenhocker tupelo [3d?]: elche können gar nicht hocken, die haben keine kniegelenke Pinguschaf [-]: doch wir knicken halt nach hinten ein SuperSonic [-]: Familie: Hirsche, Unterfamilie: Trughirsche SuperSonic [-]: Ich wusste da war etwas faul
maybe this is slack  reid: Well, it's pretty big.  But if black invades promptly, it's hard for white to hold onto the whole left side.  For example, black A or B takes a pretty big bite out.  Black doesn't have to worry too much about white D18: black B14 is almost sente thanks to the aji of D12.
From here on I had touble with my internert connection and as a result of this I had timetrouble. the game is getting rough. I dont know if it makes anny sense to comment the rest.  Thanks a lot for anny comments!  reid: OK, we've covered a lot of ground here.  Some important things to take away from this are:  1. Be consistant with your strategic goals - don't try to take everything.  2. Don't take small stuff too early - leave it for endgame.  3. When playing lightly, be prepared to sacrifice pieces of your groups.  On black's side:  1. Don't be so nice to your opponent!  Your job is to make your opponent miserable!  When you've got him on the ropes, keep him squirming!   Good luck, play strong!    reid
bad move I played too fast here but had no time
no need for this of course...
This move is O.K, but slow. Generally, you want to approach an enemy stone now.
White made a mistake - He played on the fourth line in an area that Black is strong in.  4th line is for influence, not territory - It's harder to make a base with.  Therefore, to punish white, you can take his base away while expanding your corner.  Also, White started an approach and didn't finish it. His lone white stone is weak.
Keep in mind that White never responded to your approach. You can punish him harder for that.  This move is a little weak - You could play closer to White's stone and take away it's base.  For example, A instead.
Bad move by W - It doesn't do anything.
Don't touch a weak stone. It only makes it stronger. This is NOT an attack.  A B or even C are attack points, but going directly under only makes it stronger.
W cannot afford to tenuki. You should ignore it and Hane (Turn the corner) on the White stone.  See variation.
Play urgent moves before big moves.  On top, your stone is attached to his. Whoever plays there first gets a huge advantage. If White Hane's at A, you lose a lot. If you Hane at B or C, white hurts a lot.  The left is also urgent. If you play D, you have a base. If White plays D, you have to struggle to live - And White will profit on top, left, or middle while you fight, although you will probably live.
Not yet time. There's holes all over the place.  Secure the corners and sides before center. Note that NONE of the sides or corners are set territory yet - They can all be invaded.  Marked points are all invasion points for one color or the other.
Again, you should be playing the urgent moves.  Marked stone/areas are urgent.
W cannot afford to be ignoring these moves. The marked stones are in critical condition.  This move is also over crowded. The triangled area is where the most unclaimed territory is, even if it wasn't a critical spot.
Good - Attack the lone stone. However, there are other stones that are still much weaker.
Great move by White, solidified the lower left.  Note that you can still invade. (Not that you should -- But the area isn't solid territory yet.)
No, you need to make a base.  Also, the stone is likely dead - Too far in.
Black got lucky that he lived and got a wall to the center.  But White still got the whole bottom side -- And B's groups are all cut up.  All these groups are very weak. Compare the side of what W got with what B got.
Not good -- Play solidly, instead of risking White making atari's.
Again, you should play solidly instead. Triangle is much better.
Your groups are split, your stones are weak and W is strong.  This happened because you let W touch your weak stone and keep his stone there.
You shouldn't even be fighting this K.O.Play R3 instead - White will be in deep trouble.
Wrong move - See variation.
Wrong move again.
B is Dead.
Don't bother with that stone!  If you're trying to live, make that your first priority, that ston'e only worth 4-5 points!
What was this about?  You just wasted a K.O. and gave white a free stone for influence for no reason.
Again, don't touch a weak stone.
These stones have zero chance! Don't let W get stronger - He's building a wall towards your side.
Those cuts/weak groups I talked about earlier, and letting white build a wall cost you big time. That is the reason that white managed to destroy your stones.
! Don't let white in! Must block!  White cannot cut at P.
Again, you should be blocking. See previous variations on why White cannot cut.
You're in danger.
B has two big groups that are very weak -- Be very careful. I shows some of the possible results. All very bad for B.
i would keep this move in reserve, because you can always play this lat er, as a ko threat.
dennis: This was a bit of a peculiar move for me, and  i didn't know if  it was good or how best to react to it...  it looks also strange to me...
dennis: This move troubles me. I didn't see a way to connect undern eath, and killing it wasn't really feasable either.  Does this mean that I should have played A at B instead?  Are there rules of thumb for this kind of reductions/invasions at the side?  Yes B was better than A moreover, white's move is not good
this fight is good for black
here, you have a broken shape ; this is very good for white
dennis: we don't remember when the exchange 42-43 happend, but i put it here because white 66 makes no sense without it, so it had to happe n before...  whatver the moment when this move was played, it is a typicaly bad kikashi : white A group lost 1 liberty
because of this broken shape, it is hard for black to fight here
also a bad kikashi
dennis: I though white should have played at A  i agree,   now you can see that black's corner is in trouble. This comes from the fact that black should have played C instead of B
the wrong point
White Resigns
fantomas27 [1k]: salut
fantomas27 [1k]: bonne partie
mutix [2k]: de même
janr: blacks move is unvoncentional
Is p7 correct ? I ve never seen this o5 move  janr: the white move is very high too.  Maybe just at A it the simplest way.  Then it's blacks task to make use of his unusual keime construction.
I thought it was the vital point of black shape but i think i did something wrong here.  janr: maybe you should attack the black wall from a larger distance?
janr: it's not clear to me that this exchange is good for black.
janr: the 3-3 invasion is early. black will get a wall
janr: its beter for black to play A instead of B is he intends to play at C anyway
Also my first time seeing this move  janr: I would prefer to take the corver and stabilize the black group.
janr: no white could take the corner and the black group gets weaker.
janr: usually, it's not good for black to make this peep.  now white will not have a shortage of liberties any more.
janr: I'd prefer black to play at A
now that i think about it, maybe it's the wrong direction. Was e12 better ?   janr: this seems ok.  But A is sente I think fir black, so white B would be a good move.
janr: I prefer A or B.  This shape feels heavy for white.
jarn: I prefer A
janr: white is not unhappy with this capture.
janr: If black went for influence by getting a ponnuki in exchange for the corner, then he should now take the center instead  of taking a few points on the border.
this exchange is only useful to live locally.  now black can make the monkey jump
janr: after this white move, there are no more points in the center.
A is more urgent (do not allow your opponent a hane on the top of two stones)
the exchange is not good for black
connecting is not urgent.  the group above is alive, and white can make the group below alive if black cuts by playing dame.
black makes territory with his potentially weak group
black does not see a double atari.  More than 6 free points for white.
connecting is reverse sente and hence better
this is smaller than A or B i think
I'm not sure what white is thinking here.  The black stones at c14 and c11 cant be cut without help.  The group of white stones near g9 is still weak  Does the outcome of this attack hurt or help that group?
So far white' attack has only led to a threat of the g9 group being cut off on 3 sides.
white tries to cut again, but think first about whether black is connected.
black is safe, and white is left with an inefficient lump of 7 stones at c14, with a shortage of liberties.
this forcing move by white makes sense .  .
...but this is just inviting black c7 and loss of sente.
white's chance of getting an eye on the side is gone, so he tries to run; this makes sense.
but this move does not make sense.  f11 was trying to connect to the outside; why not go ahead and finish the connection by playing f12?  As it is, this is an empty triangle, without any justification.  e10 and f11 were already connected; they dont need another stone unless and until black plays e11 or f10.
Now white is cut off on all sides - before playing more stones inside, think about whether its possible to live without extra moves.  here, it doesnt really look like it (e9 and d10 are both critical points, and white cant take both of them at once), so its better to find somewhere else to play if possible.
this is just throwing good stones after bad - if that group is going to live, it's because it gets connected to the outside, not because it makes 2 eyes.  Losing the stones at g9 and 8 is the least of white's worries.
this cut is white's last chance, so doint play it unless it can work.  Otherwise save it as a threat.
This ended up working out well enough for black anyway, but did you consider threatening the snapback at o11 sooner instead?
[Calvin]: The opening so far is a common one.  Usually black approaches at A or B instead of D15, but this move is very big, too.
[Calvin]: This is a typical beginner mistake.  This move is usually only played when white has stones already in place such as at A, B, C, or D.   Then, the intention would be to make black's group heavy for attack.  Here, it is a 1-one-1 fight, so this strategy will not work.  See variations for other ideas for white.
[Calvin]: This move is too low and doesn't put sufficient pressure on black.  If white wants simple territory, it would have been better to play 8 at 7.
[Calvin]: You see that black gets an ideal extension.   Also, black A (J17) is sente and black B (F17) can be useful forcing move.
I answered this move with a sequence which gave me a pretty fine result I think. White didn't get that much actual profit and black got a good wall. Was this a correct way to play it, or are there any beetr more conventional ways? aswell for black as for white.  [Calvin]: White's move is an overplay.  First of all, white's extension at the top is thinner than the usual plays at A or B.  Secondly, this higher extension at D11 is harder to invade.
[Calvin]: Of course.
[Calvin]: The result clearly favors black.  It white just wants more territory, white could have played the hane at B15 directly without this invasion which has strengthened black.
[Calvin]: This move is not a good idea for white.
[Calvin]:  See variation.
[Calvin]: Black should tenuki.
[Calvin]: White should tenuki.
[Calvin]: This kind of move should be saved as a ko threat for the endgame.   First of all, in the opening white may not answer this because capturing those stones is gote and not so big.
[Calvin]: White may tenuki.
[Calvin]: The result is clearly good for black.  The marked points represent the increase in white's territory.  Since black played the high extenion, black was not expecting much territory on the side anyway.  Black's wall has a wasted move (E13) but is very strong and black took sente.  E4 is perfect.  Black develops on a whole-board scale and white is confined to the corner.  It is looking like a handicap game for black now.
[Calvin]: This is the usual move, but maybe a special plan is in order due to black's thickness.   See variation.
[Calvin]: See variation.
Again for the follow-up on this move. Is my answer ok, or did I have to approach this stone from another side in order to correspond with the stones already on the board? I thought this sequence gave me a fair result by making shure I kept the corner to myself, Although white had a chance of trying to get me into trouble a few moves later by playing R17 8 moves later.  [Calvin]: At this point you have to decide what's important, because the top is white's sphere of influence.  Probably the worst thing for black would be to jump at A.
[Calvin]: I think this is a good move, as long as you treat the marked stone lightly.   See variation for a bad move :-)
[Calvin]: To play this wedge, white needs to check the ladder to capture the O16 stone.  This ladder is not working, so white can't play this way right now.
[Calvin]: This is proper since white didn't check the ladder, but black may be able to choose the outside atari at A as a variation.
[Calvin]: This move is a mistake.
[Calvin]: Black should take the ponnuki at P15 without hestitation.   See variation.
[Calvin]: This move is questionable.  White can connect at O16 in sente.  See variation.
[Calvin]: White missed a big chance.  See variation.
[Calvin]: I don't like this pincer here in this situation.   Remember that black wants to play K4, maybe even immediately.   This move doesn't do so much.
[Calvin]: See variation.
[Calvin]: I don't think this invasion is a great idea for black.  It looks as if black has just played the marked exchange, strengthening white and then decided to invade.   (In fact, that's not even tewari, but the actual sequence of moves. :-)  Without that exchange, maybe the invasion would work out better.
[Calvin]: I'm not sure white should defend this garbage stones right away.  See variation.
[Calvin]: This atari has no value.  Black will not play R12!   See variation.
[Calvin]: It seems that white has caught up a bit.  Black has too much second line territory on the right side that's not adding up to much.  If you go back and compare to the position where black takes the ponnuki, you can see this is relatively much better for white.  K4 is a very big point, which negates the effect of black's marked wall.  (Compare to a black play there.)  Black had a very clear lead at move 29, but now has to worry about losing on territory.
[Calvin]: This move dosen't put pressure on white's marked stones sufficiently and R5 is already strong.  Also, the marked shape is thin, so it's a half-measure.
[Calvin]: See variation.
[Calvin]: See variation.
[Calvin]: Way too aggressive!
[Calvin]: White's connection exposes black's thin connection at the bottom.  It is hard to kill the white stones for this reason.
[Calvin]: White may be able to push at A and fight.  See variation.
[Calvin]: White A (N8) may be a tesuji.  See variation.
Starting from this move I started to lock white in, but I messed up a bit later on, aswell as by letting white out, as by forgetting to get my black group alive. would there have been a beter way to lock and kill white and to prevent it to escape?  [Calvin]: It shows good thinking, but you have to remember that the marked connection is not so strong for black, so it might be on overplay.  Black's thinking should not be to kill white, but to have two targets (marked) to attack.  It is important for black not to get cut to pieces.  Defense first.   See variation.
[Calvin]: Yes, this is black's weakness.
[Calvin]: I'm not sure white is easy to kill now.
[Calvin]: This move doesn't connect black's stones at the bottom.  But I'm not sure O2 is good either.  See variation.
[Calvin]: Slow.  I would connect at O1.  See variation.
[Calvin]: see variation.
This is where white started getting out.
This is where  I should've had played to keep my group alive.  [Calvin]: Yes. ;-)
[Calvin]: This doesn't work.
[Calvin]: White doesn't need to play here.   Black can't live even with another move.
[Calvin]: Small.  Black has lost a group, but has to focus, because the situation on the board has changed a lot.   The marked black and white groups both are weak as they lack eyeshape.  Whoever secures the weak group in the center will have the advantage in upcoming fights.  See variation.
[Calvin]: The past few moves are very small.
I suppose I played this one one space too far. It should have been K18 I suppose.  [Calvin]: Yes, but forget that.  Count.  Black is more than 30 points behind on the board.   This sort of endgame move isn't going to cut it.  Black must look to kill something, and the only target is white's marked group.
[Calvin]: See variation.
[Calvin]: White is not seeing black's plan.   See variation.
Here I started beseiging a second white group in order to try to save my damage from before.  [Calvin]: Good idea.
[Calvin]: White is dying now.
A (C2) is a bigger endgame move.
[Calvin]: This move is dangerous.  Would white play there?   See variation.
Here I think L10 would've been better in order to prevent white's next move, but I still managed to get out.  [Calvin]: L10 fine, too.
[Calvin]: White misses a big chance.   See variation.
[Calvin]: This move doesn't help.  Save it for a ko threat.   See variation.
[Calvin]: Gote.
[Calvin]: Not required.
To be able to actually use this move I think I needed a stone at D4 or D6.  [Calvin]: No need to try to trick white here.  Black is still slightly ahead.
[Calvin]: Gote.  Black can't kill here.   If white takens sente, white might just barely win.   See variation.
This wove was unnecessary I suppose.  [Calvin]: Black is dead.
ich think this was to slow, but i somehow wanted to get corner and attack c7 ....  C7 is a fine move. But...
this is a very bad move, by black.
this move is terrible! it accomplishes nothing, except removing a large ko threat, and removing a liberty on l16. this is a move you keep in reserve, not play right away.
you are playing fairly well. black isn't quite alive yet, so the result up to here isn't bad.
strong move
not good i guess  correct. no need to remove your own liberties.
black took the big point on the right. white this is a good move for attacking his center stones, black is leading on territory alone.
this move is truly incomprehensible
this is a basically good move
it is strong to resist at O14, but your next move did not make sense to me..
black takes the big point, to neutralize your center. this way he stays in the game by the skin of his teeth
this is a very bad move. it helps black build power and territory; the territory you make in comparison is peanuts.
too deep :/ ?  the problem with this move, is that it has little coordination with your stones or his stones.
this was very bad!! you push black to attack your stone better, AND THEN try to save your stone. this means you must play twice as many moves just to rescue your silly piece. you should defend your stone directly instead.
ugh!~ you have driven black between your weak stone and your strong position. this is terrible
black is handling this situation well
black gave you impetus to make shape. poor fellow
still a good move fro mhim
j15 worked here, too, but n12 was better.
j15 works for black :/  i have no idea why black did not play M11.
?
honibo [6k]: thx ojr [6k]: thx  black had some small chance, if only he defended his gain from the ko.
[kb]: So far, so good.
I didn't want to play L3 because after white G3 black B2 would by gote or after running into the center would have no value. I thought about R8 too, but after white R13 R6 is open and the upper right corner may be invaded. So I played C12.
[kb]: This looks like a good choice to me, although Black can play on the right side as well.
This move is the right direction, though you could play more aggressively and play at J17.
[kb]: This move is a mistake by White.  It's better to extend towards the enclosure at R7.
Good
He had to add a stone atR12/13 now, so I liked this.  [kb]: I would have rather invaded.  The shape is too comfortable for White after you defend here, and you have a chance to put your enclosure at the bottom to more work.
[kb]: This move looks a little awkward.  Reinforcing at P4 is better if you're going to play here.
Largest place on the board, though the invasion still remains.
I didn't like K15 because H15 would take some pessure on my left side group.  [kb]: This is a bad move - you're fixing White's weaknesses.  It's better just to tenuki or play K15.  See the variation on move 32 to see why.
[kb]: It's quite clear that the marked exchange did not help Black.
This tenuki is bad timing.
Now the weak group is nearly connected.  [kb]: Yes, in sente.  White's move at E12 is looking wasted.
I decided that invading there would be unreasonable so I tried to build a moyo.
At this point I counted both players nearly equal but evaluated my prodpects on th upper side better.  [kb]: Why tenuki now?  You can finish with P12, forcing your opponent to try and come in, and then you'll probably get to play S5 anyway.
Now I didn't want to play Q15 becaus of white O12. I thought long about O13 and if white cuts at Q15 N14. But I feared M14 and the situation is unclear to me.  [kb]: That's because of your tenuki at the bottom.
[kb]: Good, getting to play here is large.
Now I can cut thru F11 which will give me another 10 points. But this is too early now.  [kb]: Correct.  White's marked moves look like attacking moves, but there's nothing to attack here.
Securing my the group and preparing to develop into the center.  [kb]: Good.
But he ignored this.
[kb]: Connecting is probably better, but this is a calm response.
[kb]: Now your moyo is gone.  In fact, if White cuts your stones at Q13 then White can get a moyo.
As hat has added some stones there I decided not to allow the connection to the right side group.
[kb]: This move is smaller because of the presence of the circled moves.  White should be trying to develop central influence to turn the top marked stones into territory.
[kb]: Correct direction.
[kb]: Good way to expose the shape.
If I answer, the cut at P13 is severe.
[kb]: This move is more sente than his, so you get the privilege.  Good.
[kb]: Pulling back for White is better.
[kb]: This move looks somewhat necessary, but meaningless.  Better to start the endgame with S17 first, then B2.
Too quick. I misread this as sente...  [kb]: It's still a large move.
Suddenly his center moyo became a threat.
[kb]: White can't have everything...
I thought this woulf be enough to win. But it is very difficult for me to count accuratly enough.  [kb]: Then let's count accurately.  As I count it:  Black: 59 - 15 (top) - 26 (left) - 7 (bottom left) - 21 (bottom right)  White: 48.5 + X - 13 (top left) - 8 (right) - 9 (bottom) - 11 (left) - 7.5 (komi) - X (center)  So Black needs to limit the center to 10 points.
[kb]: This move is a mistake - it's very small.
White did not see that this is sente against the right.
I decided this side because I evaluated the corner bigger than the side. Now I think this is not true.  [kb]: Agreed, because the center isn't settled.
[kb]: A mistake - defending at R7 is better.
A mistake. O10 seems better
I counted roughly now. I think this is nearly equal on the board. But I have defects now at B15, T15 and Q2, so I decided to try a little.
[kb]: This move is very bad and allows you to get so much.
[kb]: See variation to capture.
Seeing this I gave up after some moves.  [kb]: Yes, this is the end.  Well played though.
R: Minor mistake. A isn't established and B Could work better. See variation for further explanations
up to this point i've been mirroring to keep balance of influence and balance of the board letting him attack first. is this good or should i have tried an invasion here?  R: This isn't that good or that bad. It isn't that bad because the left side looks quite ok, mostly on the lower side. It isn't that good because the marked stones are not established, especially D17. The two black marked stones are in trouble too since they are vulnerable. I circled the invasion points you are vulnerable to and marked with letters the weaknesses of your opp. You will notice that if the opponent cuts at C15 or D15 your upper stone is kind of lost
I wanted to keep past the half point on the edge and thought responding low would give me some security to anchor against the side.  R: you always have to think this, when you're playing GO: what is the biggest move? You don't have to reply to any single opponent move directly. Here A or B are quite urgent. and very big. F is good too but a bit complicated. CDE are fair alternatives
R: endgame move. You can't cut through your opponent's  stones. This only takes away from him a couple of points while you can make many more by establishing D17 or attacking Q17
R: never try to go throug a 1 point jump: you'll only strenghten your opponent. now he has the lower right corner
here i was satisfied that i had a sufficient wall starting and wanted to expand my moyo.  R: see past comments about the stability of your moyo. Regardless, if you want to expand it you can try by a high invasion on A or B. But you have to play C in this situation
should i have gone with A instead to protect the left side? I thought that D10 provided some influence and that I needed to prevent a stone at D18 as a reply to a move at A  R: Yes, you should've. I replyed this thouroughly before.
Here B chose to move at A. perhaps move 20 should have been there instead? R: yes of course. It's a common rookie mistake in the opening. 20 is a wasted move
R: endgame move...  You should have tried to prevent further invasion at A and then play B
R: Ok. A or B should be good too, maybe better since they prevent the seek for eyes on the side where they are easy to find
R: this is why A or B at move 28 were better
R: This is an endgame move that wins you a opint or two... you have to prevent an invasion at A, just like the one Black did before
R: too small again. A, B or C are way bigger
R: I don't like this stone. It's too far away from its neighbours A, B and C and can be easily cut
R: A is a cut point for Black and white should defend there
R: mistake... L12 doesn't give a cut point to the enemy
R: A is  a cut point and so is B. these are problems to take care of
R: see variation
here i became more worried about his movement into my moyo that i didn't see it forming an attack on my stones from N6-P8  R: It was already too late to defend, I think. You played correctly trying to prevent an enormous invasion into your moyo
i noticed here the weakness of his group and decided to attack at C13 once I had sente.  R: If black plays B13 now the group isn't weak and has two eyes. You picked the correct time to attack, though
make the attack R: I don't think that C13 is the best place to attack. See variations for further insight
R: why here? A - to prevent a cut B- to be extra sure on the corner  if he tries to invade there you can make his life very very hard by preventing him to find the sides and so to make eyes
it was close here, but i think i was just a little behind and so needed to attack. i really don't know how to attack as the sequence will show. that's why i tried to expand my moyo early and then defend the edge while simplifying. any help you can give from here is much appreciated.  R: you tried this attack far too late imo. but if you wanted to try you should have tried at R17, sicne the 3-3 point can make live forms even in difficult situations. In order to live, in fact, you have to search for the corner and, in this situation, can only be made with R17. I honestly don't know if you can make any good forms, though, due to the strong black stones
R: this is a big mistake, an insulting mistake. if you have seen that A is a false eye and tried to play away for the group is dead ok but this move has no purpose... the opponent isn't an idiot and can see the threats of your cut
he chose to take his turn attacking and did what i was hoping for.
R: I would have closed by the lower side since finding eyes in the center is more difficult.
i should have passed again but thought i had something figured out. not sure what it was though. all i really accomplished was being a pest.
On this board, according to Yilun Yang (7p), enclosing  3-4 corner stone (B) is a much higher ranking move than approaching a 4x4 stone (A).  He ranks opening moves as follows (I have quoted only the relevant parts of the rankings): First Class: play in an empty corner Second Class (1): Enclose or approach a 3-4, 5-3, or 5-4 point stone ... Third Class (4): Approach a corner with a 4-4 stone.  I'm quoting from his book Fundamental Principles of Go 2004. This is not to say that A is a bad move, but B is the simpler, and more valuable move in theory. For me, I feel like A is a 70% move.  consider how B not only encloses a corner, but also has great follow ups.  See variation.
P17 is a little unusual.  F17 approaches white's 4x4 stone, but white has tenukied.  This is usually reserved for a special strategy.    For me, as black, I would prefer punishing white's choice to ignore the approach.  The purpose of the 4x4 stone is to build influence; black can severely reduce that potential development now by a second approach...see variation.
black is inviting a splitting move here.  Not necessarily bad, but black has to be prepared to fight.
white is taking profit, while black is having to respond in gote
This peep is sente, but doesn't help the A group run out.  It strengthens the white C group, and in so doing, hurts black's own B group.
black is wise to spend a move to help this group, but the other weak group is now in danger.
locally, this was very nice for white - big corner that is almost settled.  and white can push out along the side at C12.
this move has very little purpose
likewise, H16 is not an important stone.  It does not connect two weak black groups; it does not cut any white groups; allowing it to be captured would give white 2 points.
again, these two stones are worth very little on this board.
this move is harming the M15 group
again, black is pushing white to black's weak group. Not good.
This move helps white more than black
wasted move. I remember a proverb I learned from a 4d that I'm not sure the source of, but: "Don't go for the eyes until you have hold of the neck."  The "neck" here is the marked stone.  White is out and not surrounded.
now, sooner or later, black has to come back and fix the weakness at N11
I am very uncomfortable with leaving this cut here
inviting a cut
some experiments exploring responses on the left follow here. I think I like C best.
outstander [7k]: hello, thank you for reviewing my game. i think it was pretty even throughout and no MAJOR mistakes on either part. something to keep in mind however: i was wondering if there was any better way to reduce w's right side, which i let become massive. any comments + variations, particularly in the opening, would be greatly appreciated.  oh yeah, a couple more things. 1) could you please point out the losing move to me? i think it was my letting him unnecessarily have the monkey jump in the lower left. 2) could you recommend me any good go books? i just finished reading 'the fundamentals of go' and found it improved my game a lot. where should i go from here?   Hello This is first reviev i make for gtl, hope it will be good.:) Black got really nice start in this game but then he gave little to many points on the right side.  About go books: 1.Any book with tsumego for your level will be good(1001 life and death problems for example).  2.Also you could study same joseki book(get strong at joseki)-don't only remember moves but try to understand each of them. 3.Tesuji- wrote by Davies. 4. Studying same modern pro games may be good idea as well, but i don't know any good book for it.
outstander [7k]: hhi
This move has same bad aji. Usually it's better to play A or B insteed. See variation.
Pushing here is usually bad move. It makes black really strong. See variation.
Black is happy to answer.
Too slow! White should pincer.
I don't like this move.
White made black really strong and gained nearly nothing. Black is leading already.
This might be little to slow.
A bad move, black is really strong in this area so he should avoid this joseki.  See variation.
outstander [7k]: maybe a move around here?  White gets bad shape, he should think about: See variation.
I don't think its important move for black.
outstander [7k]: is this move better? i also think that i made a joseki mistake in this corner... true?  Black didn't make mystake in joseki, but the one he choose wasn't good in this situation.
This is odd.
Ok, time to estiminate score.  I would say white has about 25 points at top left corner and about 30 to the left(still not safe points) and maybe about 10 with bottom group. so total 25+30+0,5+10 = about 65,5 points total   Black has about 32 points at the bottom and about 26 to the left + about 10 to the top 32+26+10 = 68 points.   So both sides got about equal terytory but black is safe everywhere and white can still be invaded.
Strange move, White missed good chance to attack black stones.
White is trying to make same ko for cut. But it does not even work. See variation.
Strange, why not P5? its good and simple.
Capture..:)
Too late!
Aggresive! But looks good in here.
Now you let white cut you!
Black lost soo many points here!
Bad. See variation.
Small endgame move. See variation.
It is nearly dame, you should block corner or tenuki. This might be losing move, it cost you many points. See variation.
outstander [7k]: this is the monkey jump i was talking about...
I will end comments here as only yose left now. Both sides missed(played them quite late) few big moves in it while playing 1-2 point gote moves.   Big yose points for. (C for black E for white, rest for both sides.  Also  in the SGF i can see that white won this game by 3,5 points but from what i count black is leading at the end. Are you sure you market all dead stones?
Just example of small move, S4/S5 is much bigger.
Risky?  Az: Not risky - you're stronger than white is here - but maybe a little off the mark. 'a' is probably better since it attacks both stones and it's harder for white to surround you on the 4th line.
Az: Good move.
How to play here? Protect or run out?  Az: This is ok
Az: This is ok for black
Az: Better at 'a'
Az: Peep and then attache on top with 'c', black doesn't want to get surrounded and have to live locally.
At this point I felt that I didn't use the tengen stone efficiently.  Az: Attacking these stones is more important than the center group now - you can attack it later.
Az: Good fighting spirit, but until black has a stone at 'a' this isn't really very severe. That might be a better place to start.
Az: Slow. You need to decide if you are going to hold onto these stones or give them. For a handicap game you should be especially aware when creating weak groups. The most severe response is 'a', but since you haven't yet seperated the white stones with 'b' and this is a handicap game that might be a little too much. If on the other hand you decide you're ready to give up your stone, attaching at 'c' makes white over concentrated.
Az: Whether black lives or dies, the result is going to be bad for sure. Being forced to live locally like this costs you a handicap stone each time - and the price goes up if you try to live but die.
Az: Good move
Az: This is not as urgent as closing the corner to attack white. It makes your stones strong, whites weak, and takes profit in sente. As white runs out (since w cannot connect) you can play here naturally.
Az: This is always the wrong answer. Play on the other side first, even if you then change direction (less profit for white and weaker shape).
Looking back I think I could have extended a little farther.  Az: Bad idea, stay tight since you want to have strong shape for the fight that's coming in the center.
Az: Cutting immediately is risky against a stronger player. You have a cut at 'b' you can use later but it's gote. Jumping to 'a' almost connects up your weak group to the other stones and you can go back to cut at 'a' moment later if W doesn't fix.
Was this cut appropriate?  Az: Even game sure, handicap game I'd worry a little.
Here I don't know how to escape.
Az: This exchange does nothing for black, so skip it and play here directly.
Az: I don't understand this move. Black cannot give up the cutting stones under any conditions, so this is one of the biggest mistakes of the game.
Az: Wrong direction of play. Double hane to use whites shortage of liberties.
Az: You can block directly without fear.
Az: Cutting at 'a' is impossible, there is no followup. The moves to consider here at 'b', 'c', and 'd'. 'b' is somewhere between 10-20 points of gote (depends if you plan on answering  to save your 4 stones, I don't recommend it). 'c' is really big because it neutralizes influences while taking profit. 'd' is not so big since your corner is already strong. So 'c' is probably best since the terroritory here is small.
Az: This is not really very big, especially since it *only* saves your 4 stones, you need another move to capture white. Therefore this is worth only 8-10 points. White seems fairly strong so I wouldn't assume white will play here necessarily, but if he does you stand a fairly good chance of winning (see variation).
Should I have saved the black stones? I think I lost more territory than I gained here...  Az: This is only a few points better than passing at this point of the game. The other stones are much bigger in terms of points but also in terms of the whole board.
Az: Defend at 'a', white cannot connect.
Here should I have given up the three stones? (I added a variation here)  Az: The white group is alive but not with too much room to spare. You should descend to threaten white (this is most often the best move, though not always).
Az: Much too far so close to thickness. Something like 'a' is more reasonable.
How to respond to the attachment? I saved the corner, but could I have been more aggressive?  Az: White is not being unreasonable here, black was thin. Best to keep the corner and then worry about the damage.
Az: 'a' is the *only* move.
Az: 'a' is still best, black has bad aji this way
Az: Defending at 'a' is easiest. In the game black made things very complicated but ended up with less profit in the end.
Az: Black is down a significant number of points now, end of comments.
Could I have avoided ko?
When I look back at the score now I get the dreadful feeling that I could have been winning but lost because of the upper left-hand corner. Do you suppose you could supply me with a rough estimate?
Flameinice [3k]: thx samabcde [3d]: thx    Thanks for reviewing my game.      Flameinice
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I was a little confused here, I expected R4.  But I think I got a good result.  ff - If we look at professional play, R4 has been the most frequent play by Black at this point.  However, the play at Q5 has consistently produced better results.  It is certainly more active and shows a more positive approach.  So White needs to be ready to answer it.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: After the game I looked at some pro games, and I believe this was the right move.  ff - Yes, this is the normal reply.
ff - There are a variety of plays by Black here, but not usually this one.  More usual would be Q6 or Q8.
ff - Once Black starts pushing White, it is better to keep on going in order not to leave defects in the Black wall, so Q7 looks better here.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I believe it could have been much worse for me here, but black played poorly I think.  ff - This las play is clearly out of place.  It should be at Q2.  Black has nothing to fear at Q4.  After this White does not want to play Q2, which only allows Black to play P2 and fix the shape here.  Instead White plays R2, which leaves the P2 stone with nothing to do.
ff - In this position the right side has no interest for Black because of the White stone at R7.  Naturally Black is going to answer a White approach with a pincer.  It might be better for White to simply extend to the middle of the top.  See the variation...
ff - Not really interesting since White ends up very low along the whole right side.
ff - This is one normal play but looks pretty conservative in this position.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: After reviewing some pro games I believe this was the wrong side to play on, I understood that the corner was important. But I probably should have played around C14.  ff - Yes, G17 is a play when the Black stones along the top are weak.  For example, when the upper right corner is White and the two stones in the middle of the top are alone.  When the Black top is strong then White prefers to play on the left side.  C14 is one idea but C13 makes it more difficult for Black to split the left.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I wasn't quite sure what to do about this stone. In retrospect, maybe D2 directly is better.  This is just my style, I think K6 might be good too.  ff - Black plunges straight into White's strength.  This is the type of play when Black thinks that White's influence is greater than Black's.  This does not seem to be the case here.  Black might have done better to hold back.  See the variations...
ff - Both C8 and C12 are too close to the existing White positions.  Neither can be the right answer here.  See the variations...
ff - Black attaches to a very strong stone.  This does not work that well.  Black should simply jump into the center...
ff - This is an interesting approach.  White will be happy to force Black toward the lower side and then make a splitting attack.
ff - This seems to just strengthen White without really helping Black.  Better leave it unplayed.  See the variation...
ff - Not a good idea.  White makes good shape naturally without Black securing the group...
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I feel good now.  My play was pretty strong here I think, I was attacking for influence to reduce black's bottom area.  ff - Basically Black falls behind by a move through this exchange.
ff - This is from the wrong direction.  White's two center stones can not contain Black yet so it is too early to play from the other side.  Also this play is too far away from the bottom to represent a significant threat.  See the variation...
ff - Black is too ambitious here.  Better to help the left side first...
rlkeaton3 [1k]: What do you think of this move, maybe it is not so good.  F9 looks pretty good in retrospect.  ff - This play is too far from F7.  White can not securely connect even with an additional play.  Basically White has played away from the scene of the action.
rlkeaton3 [1k]: Maybe K5 is better here, im not sure.  ff - Fundamentally White is attempting to reduce a very strong Black position.  The tactical details are just fundamentals of reading that can be practiced through tsumego and tesuji books.  White would prefer to be attacking some weak Black stones instead.  The reason this is not happening here lies in the earlier plays.  Changing those earlier plays so that Black continues to have weak targets to exploit on the board will pay greater benefits than sorting out the details of local fights. :-)
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I think this is a pretty bad mistake on my part, I should just play H6
rlkeaton3 [1k]: What do you think about this, D2 better, or maybe E2  ff - Locally I tend to prefer E2, but... Is the corner going to die?  Is it the largest part of the board right now?  The difference between E2 and D2 is not an important question if this area is not the most urgent point on the board!
ff - White is lucky that Black answered.  But what if Black plays elsewhere, ignoring the corner?...
ff - White should simply connect at F11.  This produces a bad result.  See the variation...
ff - Black makes the same mistake here that White made at G11.  This would be better at G9.
ff - Now the H9 stone should be on J9.
ff - This does not look right.  White will not be able to make proper use of the wall below.  See the variation...
ff - This looks similar to White's earlier play at K6.  It is far away from the scene of the action and it leaves a large gap with the other stones just played.  I think that L12 is the natural continuation here...
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I think this is a fatal mistake.  ff - This is a gote yose play.  Once again White has turned away from the main fight.
ff - Black returns the favor :-)
rlkeaton3 [1k]: This as well
rlkeaton3 [1k]: =(
ff - This looks very dangerous.  See the variation for an alternative...
ff - It seems Black is a little too aggressive here.  White looks like being in even more trouble in the variation...
ff - Black should let White live...
rlkeaton3 [1k]: I got lucky I think
rlkeaton3 [1k]: However, still very bad for me since black is big on top now, white looks way behind.  ff - I think that White takes a too pessimistic view here.  I do not think that Black is ahead.
ff - I think that this is small and White should have ignored it in order to close the lower left corner...
rlkeaton3 [1k]: This is kind of overplay i think  ff - Before considering whether it is an overplay, we have to think about whether it is correct to answer here at all.  The lower left corner is bigger...
rlkeaton3 [1k]: =(  How should I respond here?  Maybe D3 is best.  ff - In any case it seems that this is an effective invasion.  See the variations...
rlkeaton3 [1k]: This is a blunder
ff - A dangerous slip.  White needs to give way here...
rlkeaton3 [1k]: oops
rlkeaton3 [1k]: So I can make a ko and win now, Once again I got lucky in this game.  Can you help me find some errors in my play?  ff - As we will see, this is not big enough to win the game.  White needs a bit more luck along the way.
ff - It seems to me that White gets lucky here.  Black seems to have enough ko threats to win.  What if Black had answered?...
ff - Black should have played B11 first...
ff - For a long time both sides have ignored Black's sente play at H17.  This was Black's last chance to play it and win the game :-)
FR: In the game I played C6 kakari. Was it better to complete moyo and defend right corner weakness, playing around R10?
[ZD] A is unusual; other pincers are considered to be slightly better.
[ZD] However, this answer seems to be a mistake -- you lose a chance to invade at A, or to attack B later, and your group does not become much stronger.  It is not necessary to play here to separate black, either.
[ZD] for white, I would think about A, to continue attacking.
[ZD] Given that A is far, this is playable, but still, exchanging B for C to strenghten your group might be better.
[ZD] Now A would be a good point for white.
[ZD] This move looks weird -- you will get an overconcentrated group, and strenghten white.
[ZD] This is overplay, you cannot close white in anymore.
[ZD] But white makes a mistake, so the sequence works again.
[ZD] Letting white out like this seems wrong.
[ZD] Answering this seems unnecessary.
FR: Now I think, that R14 was to passive :( Was it better to cap P14 with N14?  [ZD] Yes; A is a bit deep, B looks like a correct answer.
[ZD] A mistake from white, now his group is heavy.
FR: Was M16 better?  [ZD] I think so; A is not necessary to prevent connection, and since B is connected, it is not necessary to strenghten the group, either.
FR: Is there still any chance to kill W ot to attack him further? (L14 for example)  [ZD] L14 does not work.  K14 closes white in, giving you thickness necessary to invade left side.
[ZD] This is aji-keshi, making it harder to invade left side.
[ZD] Good point.
FR: W left side seemed too big :( But I wasn't sure about right way to invade it... Was there something better, then C15?  [ZD] I think it is too late to invade left, after the A-B exchange.
[ZD] This answer looks a bit risky, but might work as well.
[ZD] Yes, it was too late to invade there :-(
FR: Now I have wall around F14, so it would be difficult for W to make some territory in the center. But still I'm not sure about result of C15 invasion.  [ZD] Since there was not any danger that white could make a territory there, this does not seem to be a gain.
at the begining of the game you have to take the corners at first. Then, as you know : the sides. To know where to play on the side ...
let's see where there's the largest place.
Should I have protected the corner instead?  I think that's the  way. If you don't protect your stone it will be hard. Make sure that group will live by stablize them. Im' ok with this.
In such case you always have 2 choices  : A or B.   Always try to draw in you head the wall  that will result in each case. Here i've settled the wall if you're playing in A as in your game. You should be able i think to do this ^__^.  It is not the good choice because you're getting a wall but the stone in 1 seems to perturb the power of your wall.   B
Too small and black is fine.
here don't move to the 3rd line. Stay on the 4th. Because the black stone on the 4th line will cause you trouble as in your game. Your shape wasn't the best : many weakness.
I hesitated with that move as well. Maybe I should have extended on the top instead?  Well. I understand your hesitation. In one side there's a big place on the top but you worry about your group. When black came in your corner , if you've have made the good choice at first, you wouldn't hesistate because your group would have been so weak. it's a consequence of your choice before.  To answer you : if you did worry for it, playing at 1 is ente because black has to connect. then your group will have been enough strong and you could have played on the top. When you hesitate between 2 moves, try to find a move the make the oppennent answer then you can play the second move :)
here black overconcentrated his stone on the roght instead of taking the top side.
the idea is good : you want to take the top and to extend your group. Except that bmlack can come like in the game and hat move is a little too shy to takle the top. You needed to add  a move to protect, like does A.
The weakness of the 3-stones-extension.  You can connect by playing at A but it gives white a ponuki that is estimated as 30 points : not good for you.  Or a basic move is like B, but...(see variation) Here i would choose C to protect : then if your goup in the croner is alive with that move, you can focus on you other stone.
That fight didn't went well, I end with two separated groups and few territory. I'm not sure how I should have played it.
here you can play at A
By letting him separate you, it's hard to make 2 groups living whereas white has only one to make alive. (but i think you got it ^_^)
here you're reducing your B group's choices. Only the escape is now availlble. But group A has still one move to stay safe : hard...
now B is running and can wait a little.
here the stone is not important beacause your whole group is in danger and A is not giving you an eye : sacrify it to make your group living.
endly alive ;)
well, now... You have to settle your group that's not alive yet. playing at A make a gratis eye
quite big but gote and group have to be settled before.
not only roup A is under attack, now group B too.
You 're renforcing black without advantage for you. (it's too open )
Your last move make black very strong here. You didn't need to help him.
Useless. And black didn't answer.
I think I didn't do too bad on the lower side until then, having few territory but a good base to go the center, only I wasn't sure how to go on with that strategy. That black stone greatly reduced my hopes.  what if yout tell me what hopes you had, what you were thinking of ;) i could better anwser you.  Well your low group is too open and its base too small : it's not to make a big territory. But connecting with h4 would have renforce you. First point : If you had connected like i showed you, you would have a big wall and the black stone would have been so efficient.  Second point : here black is threating you.  Your top group is in danger and black is starting to surround you to cut your running if you don't answer. You have to keep an eye on it. (as you did)
well here the priority is your top group to make it live by living on place or connecting. You've chosen to connect.
so do a connecting move !
Black take off your invasion point at A and in the same time makre pressure on you. This invasion point was very important to reduce black. Maybe your last hope.  And then black has the whole side. Your last hope is to make point in the center with your both groups in 1 and 2. But it's too open to make sure territory. lack can come easily.  Your move in B offers black to end his making points on the left side. Cause he can attack you from around C like in your game.
Your move in A gives the possibility for black to attack your connection-try, while making points.
if you intend to make territory here, don't play this move. because it invite black to fight you and to enter. Conatct move is to attack and here you can't successfully attack because the black stone is connected in h2. You're inviting black's snake ( h3-h4) to grow up
you wanted territory? So close it ^__^
The end of the game. If you don't reduce black's rught side, you can give up now :).  One of the key move in this game was h4. From now I'll answer only your local questions.
here a big move you missed...
Here you got the sente. Play all the sente yose moves such as A, B, C  or D. and then only play your move. It's all for freebecause black has to respond.
I had realised before that I had to connect if black would play there, but at that point of the fight I hurried too much and fall into the trap^^  ya it happens a lot :)   Well i'm done. I hope it's enough clear . If not, don't hesitate to tell me. See you :)
This is not good.See variation
Not good.See variation
Variation.
Not good, this move is not very big and you should play bigger points like A or B.
B's pincer is like an invasion into your marked stones, so play at A B
This pincer...do you think i should have just taken R3 instead?  not R3.See Comments of previous move.
Before trying to save a stone, ask yourself : 1.Does this stone threaten to cut my opponent? 2.If I sacrfice it,will I become weak?  If the answer is no to both, then you dont need to save it.You didn't need to save R6.
Now you're crawling on the second line, B destroyed your framwork, and the stone A is damaged.
I'm never sure which way to extend on the 3-3. I'm thinking I ought to have just played D17 and taken the little bit at the top for territory.  the General rule is: Block the side where you have an extension.
at A better
Good!
My goal here was for black to connect at E15. After that, I think C12 captures C13.
If you really want to save it , play A ,B or C.but this stone is not worth saving
I all but gave up on those two stones at P10 at this point...their doom seemed inevitable.
Should've answered at A first.
It turned out that this wasn't as good a choice as I had hoped; it left me vulnerable later.
I suppose it would have been best just to play R16 and not bother here, yes? Yes.
Too early for a jump? I'm trying to make up a lot of territory here. It's probably better to play at A B or C because one move around there, and B will make a moyo.
B should've ignored you.
I debated between G2 and this, I think I've decided that G2 would have been better for the situation that comes up later.
This seems like the wrong move for black to me. E3 would have been devastating.  Yes.Black E3 and you're dead.
B should've ignored you and killed your corner at A
I plopped this down because I only had a few seconds before I'd lose on time, and it seemed for a second that black could do damage here. Thoughts on a black attack? See variation
Overplay.Should be at A
This move again was based on time constraints, but I think pushing at J10 would have been fairly bigger.  Yes.A ,B or C is bigger than it
I'm not great at life and death problems, but this seems unnecessary. Isn't it?  If he didn't play here.Black will lose some points, but will be alive.See variation  This is the last note.Overall, you played pretty well but you should pay more attention on the following things. 1.Whether a stone is worth saving. 2.BIg points in the opening 3.Common tesujis If you have problems, feel free to contact me on "leslielau" on KGS.
This was made with me having about 5 seconds on the clock, trying to read out a sequence (C19, C18, A18), but even if black played C18 I had overlooked that C19 itself would become a liberty. Heh.
[JB] I would have tried M16 probably,
[JB] I think that for white it is better to cut at J15 first.
[JB] As you can see, this move is not efficient; instead, having cut at J15 first white can play with sente. You still have the cut at H15, and it is a good point to attack. But so far I think you need to be more agressive, because black stil keeps the 2 handicap stones difference.
[JB] This is a good move for black. Now the cut at H15 is not possible.
[JB] I do not like this move. I understand you want to protect the corner, but it may be better to use a move more agressive like F16 to avoid giving sente to black.
[JB] This black move could be omitted
PM:  I wasn't sure about this, but I remembered black's shape here has a weakness.  [JB] I did not find this pattern... in fact I think that depending on black's response it can weaken the white stones at C6/C9.
[JB] Black D6 would be better
[JB] Not bad for white, but you are still behind.
[JB] I think M3 is a better invasion point. Black territory at the bottom can be destroyed. Eg. see variation 2.
[JB] This is quite safe, but I think you have to be more agressive, e.g. Q11 or R12. You still need to recover about 18 points here.
[JB] This one helps black to do some territory at the center. If you are afraid of not living, remember you still have L16.
[JB] I doubt I can do better, but in some points at the game it is important to count. Reducing here is not enough to win. Territory balance is favoring black by 14 points if you play like this, and I do not see a place for white to make so many points.  So a stronger attack or invasion is needed.  L16 may give you about 7 points and give black sente, so it is not enough. H3 is a good point but again not enough. Invading F12 directly is not enough but, if successful, will put you closer.
[JB] Since now on, if black does not do a big mistake, he should win.
PM:  I think a lot of my plays here were small, but I was pretty sure I could keep sente
JB: this is a mistake, see variation (black missed the G11 point)
PM:  Until I remembered I had to fill in here.  Still, I was feeling pretty confident that I could make some points around F8 and L8 while still cutting down the amount of territory black has on the bottom.  [JB] Notice my previous count at move 91. You can add 5 points around F8 and 4 around L8, and I did not count too much for the bottom. Black got 1 point less here at the center, but he has sente. I agree you are closer, but getting the THREE goals you mention is quite optimistic...
[JB] Now getting both L8 and F8 looks quite difficult...
[JB] This one is a neutral move... no points, and no attack
[JB] a small point, black can try in other place: E16 (sente and maybe some trick), G2 (big!)... H3 may be a good point for you, see previous variation 2.
JB: bad point: does not increase territory, does not attack, does not invade... a move in neutral territory
JB: it is better to close the big hole at the bottom side  (jump from E2)
PM:  Is there a better invasion to make here?  This wasn't as profitable as I thought it would be.  JB: H2 may work, this is a reduction. At first sight there are weakness at L3/N3, but the ko at M5 helps black. I added a couple of variations at H2 and H3 that may work.
JB: unnecessary
[JB] Why not K16?
PM:  Of course, it seems as though this is what lost the game for me, I wasn't thinking!  JB: right, it was worth 18 points (or 17 if we consider that white has sente now)
JB: not necessary, still has E16, etc.
this looks even enough to me
Since you have a shimari in the lower left corner, I would prefer to approach from the other direction to use those stones.
I think White should press harder
it is normal to try to make a base
I am a little curious about how white should respond here. Also, I played d15 planning to play this move, but as it turned out, even taking the stones I think white got the better end of the bargain since I can't extend to k17.  I think the atari
In my opinion this is very good for Black locally
K17 stone is too close to thickness now
yes
agressive response. I would be tempted to play on the other side and take sente elsewhere.
I didn't read this properly. I assume k8 was much better, since after this stuff starts hitting the fan.  Not sure about that.
useful kikashi, now what does Black want to do (^_^)
Wasn't quite sure what to do here.
Well this was a good kill
White is in trouble here
but why save this one stone?  well, you can definitely get A, but can you kill B? takes some reading.
looks better to keep pressure on white
now it is hard to cover white, maybe some attachment to be sure of compensation
too small now, you are alive surely?  You have to bully white's corner and make your group strong.  There is still a chance A could die.
now Black looks not alive yet
With the enormous number of ko threats at the bottom I didn't want to play this ko.  Well now it looks like there is no choice
best to start the ko at once perhaps?
Misread this.
Are the n18 stones really worth more than killing k8?  Probably white thought it would be seki
this move is very strange
now it is seki
but there is still this problem
maybe you should make an eye at once
Stupidity.
threaten ko from the outside normally, so to make it like kikashi
Ignoring this was bad I realized later, because of the aji of b10. I guess maybe I should have c11 instead of a8 as the second ko threat and then tried to kill c7...  Yes, but already difficult for you. Overall I think you played better than White in this game, but your technique let you down at times. I think your whole board vision was better though.
starsailor [12k]: hi gg
MissDiary: It is better to connect than to tenuki. Whenever a stone makes contact with an opposing stone, both stones become stronger.   In this case, White's stone is making contact with your stone, asking your stone to become stronger by adding another.   (see variations for more explanation and strategy ideas for applying this concept.)
MissDiary: This is an interesting move, but makes C14 stone weak and gives White a good shape. It's also very loose as a pincer, since White's shape is already strong and does not threaten White's base nor seal White.
starsailor [12k]: what is your rank
uhru [15k?]: not sure
MissDiary: Hm, looks like you want to attack White K16-N17 base. Otherwise, I don't see H18 doing anything else efficiently.  Might be best to just connect. F14 for Black can become sente later in order for Black to connect or make eyes. (see variation for connection)   Otherwise, if you're aiming to attack K16-N17 group, just go ahead and attack it But white can escape to center or attach to the corner stone.
MissDiary: This can give White moves to strengthen itself in sente.
MissDiary: A center move, not so important at the moment, since in the opening, the direction is from corners towards the side.  We only go into the center if it's absolutely necessary.    In this case, H11 looks like a pass, because what's important right now is your upper group.    If you want to tenuki, better moves would be big moves, such as K4 or R14.
MissDiary: Nice idea.
MissDiary: Okay, let's study the board for a minute.  How is white's position?  How are Black's groups?  The A group: White's corner is sealed, but alive.  No potential for more growth, so playing in that area is not big or urgent at the moment.  The B group: White's upper group is fairly secured for the moment.  This means, Black can still attack White, but White is alive, and it may take a couple of moves in order for Black's attack to be sente while White profits elswhere. Since it's settled, it's better to play elsewhere.  The C group: Black's group is connected and alive.  It has influence towards the left side and center.   Since both sides are settled, we can look for big moves to play.  Because, if we continue to play locally, the opponent can tenuki and play a big move instead, since his groups won't be in any immediate danger, making his moves more efficient.  So what are some big moves? (Possible moves are marked with a triangle) Q16 is closest to White's influence.  Black hasn't done anything in response to White's soft N17 approach, so Black can make a move in that area.  Q10 seems like a good idea, but the direction is towards the center. There's not much growing Black can do in the center as of yet. Plus, corners and sides are still open, so playing for center is not big. and Black may want some stable territory, so maybe R10?  K3 & K4 are other good locations. Maybe a possible moyo with the C group influence.  They're also nice extensions from both bottom hoshi stones.    Another idea is to play corner enclosures, like R6, N3, etc.  It tempts White to come in, allowing Black to extend from one direction.  (see variation for an example of the corner enclosure idea)  So how to choose?  Well, it depends on what it is that you want to go for in terms of strategy, direction, and building your areas.  How would you like the game developed?  What would give you a more favorable result?  Experiment.
MissDiary: A good move, but not very big at the moment since it's not quite sente. (See variation)
MissDiary: Nice tenuki.
MissDiary: Great use of aji!  Using the O14 stone as aji to strengthen your corner.
MissDiary: Maybe, don't save this stone?  It looks like it's going to cost you if you do.  The reasoning is because the marked stone is behind enemy's line (marked with a line of circles). Plus, Q10 is weakened now. One idea is you could threaten to connect with the marked stone to strengthen Q10. (see variation for an example)  Or, you could tenuki, and then, later in the game, come back to save it when it becomes crucial.  Otherwise, if you try to save it now, and then decide not to save it later, you've already lost quite a bit of stones.  So becareful of your stones when they are in a hostile area - play light.
MissDiary: This connection is not important right now. Nothing is threatening it just yet.
MissDiary: Nice life, but it wasn't necessary for you to capture. Only capture if you must, otherwise, the move is less efficient while losing a point.
Strange move, is it necessary?  MissDiary: No. White could lose some points, but it is not urgent or big.  (see variation at Move 98)   White can choose to ignore and play a bigger move.  Even if you play according to the variation and white lost some stones, what White can gain elsewhere can make up for more than what he lost.
MissDiary: Interesting.  However, if you want to play in this area, you can consider playing 3rd line.    The reason for 3rd line:  - to create distance between your stones and your influence so they don't look overconcentrated and to be efficient in covering more grounds  - it adds some stability when White approaches the bottom. (Because going on 3rd line makes territory easier by stabilizing stones.)
MissDiary: Good, pressuring White against your wall.
I
Here O7 would be better I think  MissDiary: O7 works, but you have to becareful as it'll lead to ko.  (see variations for O7)  Personally, I prefer O8, because it's straightforward.  If you like a fight, O7 or P6 is fine.  But you're leading, so you can just play simple for an easy win.
Here I should have made atari instead, I think with M8  MissDiary: Yes, M8 is good.
MissDiary: I can see your stone is trying to prevent White from damaging your area, but the bottom left corner is still very open.  The stone is high and does not balance well with your D4 stone. It seems to be more of an extension for the side points.  This is fine if you're willing to give up corner (or points on bottom) for points on side. (See variation - White takes corner and still reduce Black)
MissDiary: It is not necessary for White to connect, since White is alive.  So White could have ignored this move and done some damages to you by taking away your territory.  So, if White's groups are already alive, think about gaining more points elsewhere; don't try to cut White.   Black can, for example, go to begin solidifying the left side with c9.
MissDiary: Let's take a moment and think. Is the marked stone worth more than the points I can gain elsewhere, or is it worth less?  Let's take another stone to compare - say the B15 stone. Which stone do you think is worth more if we save it?  If we save B15, Black has a little more points in terms of territory on the left side. Plus, Black may get A15 as an endgame move, which is definitely going to be worth a couple of points.  What if we don't save B15?  If we don't save B15, White can atari and capture a stone. White may have the endgame move to reduce our left side territory as well.  If we save H9 by moving to G10 for example, all we gained was one point for the eye at G11.  And the area that H9 covers can be considered dame, meaning neutral points, so they're not worth anything.  So in conclusion, B15 has more value than H9 as a single stone, since B15 allows you more possible points than H9 can offer.   If you want to save a stone, try saving a stone with a higher value.
starsailor [12k]: thx uhru [15k]: thanks  MissDiary: Overall, you played a good game.  There were some nice and interesting moves and you seem to have a developing sense of aji and endgame. But to generalize, here are a few main things you might want to work on:  1- Shapes & hane: Don't be afraid to hane.  Read the cut if it comforts you. Learn to play better shapes by seeing what shapes make better eyeshapes and limits or expands direction. One of many ways to get stronger is to take risks and learn from them.  2- Contact Play: They only strengthened you and your opponent if the stone attaches to a weak stone, so don't be afraid to get stronger. There are more options/strategies to play when your position is stronger.  3- Valuing: Decide whether a stone is worth saving or not by comparing it to another stone/group and weighing the pros and cons.  Plus, after a fight, decide whether you can play big moves.    To decide if you can play big moves, you can choose to follow these guidelines: A) Am I weak anywhere? If so, where can I play to strengthen myself? B) Is the opponent weak anywhere?  If so, how can I attack him while gaining profit? C) If there are no weak groups, where are the biggest moves?  If there are multiple big moves, where can I play to get the best result for me?  It'll take some time to incorporate these into your play, but they should get you started on gaining more experience and understanding the game better.  They may also help you in developing your own strategies and followups over time.  Hope you find the review helpful.  If you have any questions, feel free to contact me at missdiary@live.com or on KGS as xblurb.
vlkplk: I like this closure of white`s corner. White shall just keep on mind, that at least one more move, say around R13 or R12, is needed to make upper right corner into territory.
vlkplk: Again, this W e4 seems good move. Ofcourse, it`s a joseki pattern, but I don`t remember such difficult one. I usualy play simply at 4-4 point in this situation.
vlkplk: This is very conservative move from black. Next, white has a chance to close black in lower left corner with move like C5.
I've read some stuff about opening technique but still feel quite unsure if I am using it well  The one-point-jump (4-6) is probably too short?  Should I rather pincer black 3 with  10?  vlkplk: I`m not keen in josekis at all. I believe, that on ours level we don`t need to remeber them point by point, just enough to keep some basic rules. As for something joseki-like, it would be nice to confine black in the corner with W C5 instead.   White K4 is not bad, but 1) too far from either of white stones on lower side, 2) being on 4th line, it doesn`t secure any territory (as would be seen later) and 3)too from Q3 stone to be considered as a corner closure. It`s anyway a move to keep influence.
vlkplk: Very natural answer from black. White can next play in lower right corner. Notice, that white`s two stones at E4 and K4 are quite far of each other and so not very connected. Consequently, white cannot safely jump into black`s left side moyo in this stage of game. That`s why I didn`t like W K4.
vlkplk: W D4 is sente, but not necessary now. Generally, I think, it`s a kind of move which kills any other possibilities in the corner (aji-keshi).
Here I played tenuki and regretted in later (109)  vlkplk: Yes, that`s right. White`s shape in lower left is not completed. On the other hand, it would be no good to push further, since black is on 4th line. The best move would be W F7, I think.  As for W H16, it`s hard to say. 1) it`s on 4th line - no life 2) it makes an easy attack from black, like for ex. B K15.
16 on the 3rd line better?  vlkplk: Definitely not, since there would be very small life for white. Black`s corner is already strong, so it would be hard to for white to approach ther.
vlkplk: Strange from black to tenuki on upper side.
vlkplk: Somehow, I don`t like this atari. Ofcourse it`s good idea to isolate B L17. How about variation? It strengthten white in upper side, preparing for an attack on black Q10.
vlkplk: Better bF18. This one helps white to connect at G16 (aji-keshi). Later it might come in hand for black to play G15 in sente..
vlkplk: Quite non-standard move. Why not R5 or, Q5? It 1)doesn`t connect with B Q10 well, 2)seeing as a pincer, it could be nearer to W Q3.
black plays very condensed here. Which is the best way to gain profit from that mistake (if it is one ;-) )  vlkplk: Well, it`s not a mistake, just a lost move. It only keeps black connected and nothing else.  The problem was already in 3-point jump along the 4th line. 3-point jump is said to be safe on the 3rd line, be there some alied stone alongside. But on the 4th line it`s rather loose way of connection.
What is more advisable at this stage of the game. Playing like I did or removing/attacking blacks base on the right side?  vlkplk: Blacks last two moves were of very little efficiency. On the other hand, blacks group is so strong, that it cannot be attacked directly. The best course for white, which he did anyway, would be to secure his lower side territory. Maybe, instead of W N4, N3 would be better. As it is now, black can invade somwhere, like at P3 or O3.
vlkplk: Good idea from white. Another possibility would be deep invasion at around C10.
At the end black will have the whole left side as territory. When would have been the best occasion for an invasion?  vlkplk: White should definitely split the upper black group from lower side and escape to center, having his stones around G16 as back-up. Simply pushing black was not enough, since black gained quite a huge territory along left side.
vlkplk: Well, this white move was a little bit sluggish one. White shouldn`t fear so much and try something like the cut at C13 or C15. Black stone at D12 is on the 4th line, so white either escapes to the center or lives along the side.
vlkplk: Still, white`s aim must be to invade left side, on whatever cost. D10 or C10 would be fine now. D14 stone is of not so much importance, so white can sacrifice it.
vlkplk: B E11, E10 or F11 would be better. Maybe, white could omit F11 and play M15, but than black can almost cancell the influence of white`s central group.
46: Good or bad move?  vlkplk: W F11 is nice move. White would like to have one more stone at F8 as well. Just black`s gain along left side is big. So next, white wants to play either F8 (I would) or try something for territory in the center. Like M15, which threatens B L17.
Maybe with 46 I should rather have prevented b from separating my two groups? But how?  vlkplk: Too late now, but well, white must take off black`s base, which white did, and then don`t allow black connect his stones. At the right moment, white must play something like N12, M12 or M13.
vlkplk: After W M16 and B L4, black is safe as he can either make eyes or connect his stones. For white, I would still consider L12, now.
vlkplk: This white`s L18 is minor move. Black can descend anyway and white can`t get much points there. More important now is incomming fight in the center.
vlkplk: Well, now black is 100% safe. Ofcourse, white has nice upper right corner and surrounding...
vlkplk: Finally! But it`s too late now. Black has too many options what to do with his a bit heavy, though, group.
vlkplk: Here, white was maybe happy with that black`s choice. Black could separate white central group from corner.
vlkplk: Contact moves, like this W L11, generally are used to create cutting points and as such are not suitable for attack (but good for defense :).
In the end the black group will live and I don't know how to avoid that :-(  vlkplk: Black was already well enough out in the center and there was black`s group of 5 stones as backup. So it was unavoidable that black would survive. Anyway, white got enough territory in the corner and connected his stones, which was reasonable result.
vlkplk: Black`s 75th move at K14 seems vital for life of this group (or at least avoids some disturbing moves from white.) On the other hand, starting with white`s 76, white has not much to fear from there, so he could pause in the center and play at some really important place. Like D2, M7, F6 or anything which seems big. Center is big, ofcourse, but there are still bigger points on the board.
vlkplk: For example W 92 was absolutely unnecessary move. But same could be said for each other move in the sequence from W 76 until W 92, except, ofcourse, the moves which enclose black group in the center. But there is a hole (as a result of contact play by white...)
vlkplk: Ofcourse here, white`s connection was essential.
vlkplk: White`s 96 was too dangerous, since there is cutting point while black is stoned. Better G5 or G4. D2 might be also good, but there is danger of black`s invasion.
vlkplk: Again, white`s R10 - a contact move. I don`t say it was bad in this situation, but generally non-contact play is better for attack. Anyway, black is still strong and it would be hard to take out all his possible eyes.
vlkplk: White`s S6 - dtto.
vlkplk: White ends in a gote! Toward the end of game, the sente/gote choice gets more importance, as a value of free points on the board diminishes.
vlkplk: Again, now it`s black who gives up initiative to white here.
I always knew this move had to come, but never found the time to secure the territory before. Which would have been the best move to prevent this invasion?  vlkplk: D2 would do. But other moves helped this black`s invasion. White 96, 98 didn`t prevent completely the cutting point at F5. But basicaly, the problem was that 3 white`s WEAK stones and they were sitting there from beginning...
vlkplk: Good idea, but maybe F3 would make better shape.
vlkplk: Strange move from black. Quite dangerous. I liked white`s continuation (until that mistake...)
vlkplk: Was this a misclick from white? L3 would do it as well.
128: A shocking mistake! Which would have been the best possible 128 move?  vlkplk: Just keep going straight. Black cannot escape.
Golo [14k]: Hello? ;-)
vlkplk: Black has missed this point! So white could get nice central territory. Should black played there first, white`s center would have become very small.
vlkplk: Just small endgame mistake by white. See variation.
vlkplk: Any move inside black`s left territory was -1 point for black (we are not using Chinese rules...)
165: I never thought that 165 would do any harm to me at this stage, so I didn't play there myself. Was I right?  vlkplk: Well, if white plays there, it would be 1 point in sente. On the other hand, there is that terrible sequence as in variation, which result I myself couldn`t foresee, so almost I would connect at G3.
vlkplk: 176 - no point here. Better Q11.
vlkplk: 2 points sente for black, so at least 3 point move. White would better defend it here beforehand.
vlkplk: No threat after cutting at J4.
[jeff] widen your perspective by looking at the whole board! as you progress, this will become easier.  consider moves at the marked points.
[jeff] it seems as if black was trying to build a large moyo on the right side. consider white at A or B.
This move might not be the best, though I'm not sure.  [jeff] this move was played too early. it actually makes black stronger since black plays J17, etc.
Was hane appropriate here (as per the hane at the head of two stones proverb) or was it a poor play defensively?  [jeff] this move leaves a weakness at H16 (black is already strong with the K17 group. white should have played H16 instead of this hane.
Should I have performed another hane to G18, or was the cut appropriate? I was planning to try for the upper left corner.
This move does not seem the best, looking back considering my plan - was atari on F17 better?
This move I hoped would help get at least some center-bound framework.
Upper left seems lost now or at least small... Is tenuki to put pressure on the right side (maybe using tengen and my triangle at H16) appropriate, or is fighting for the territory in the upper left still big enough?
I wanted to try to possibly reduce black's expansion.
Doesn't work; I seem to be in a position where left side is more likely (as occured in the game itself).
Still trying to reduce Black's corner; unfortunately, it seems like it has the side effect of enlarging his side.
Might be able to get something from that sequence, but it's clearly less than black.
Trying to expand to use my stone at tengen to build a larger framework.
I'm guessing H16 group is dead.  [jeff] in this situation, K15 was a small move. there are still many big points throughout the board.
Trying to steal a corner from black; however, things get messy.  [jeff] this is fine, but playing kakari at A or B is better.
What was better - hane at S4, or extension at O2?  [jeff] please see the variation
[jeff] white usually plays S3 instead of decending here. the reason is to gain sente later during the endgame. please consider the variation.
Necessary?  [jeff] very necessary. i usually play S3 here.
P1 was probably the correct move.  [jeff] after black's response to this move, white should abandon this corner as it is lost.
[jeff] please consider this shape. T2 is kyusho. if white plays at T2, this shape will live; however, black got there first.
[jeff] ineffectual. you should tenuki.
I just noticed - would T1 instead possibly create two eyes, or is this group unconditionally dead at this point (as of 61)?  [jeff] this move is ineffectual. T2 was kyusho and since black played there, black took the lower right corner.
[jeff] please consider the weakness at A.
[jeff] white should have taken advantage of black's mistake with K4.
Was J1 better?  [jeff] white should have played H2.
[jeff] this move seems as if it was rushed. please consider your liberties.
[jeff] this move still leaves weaknesses at A and B. please consider these points carefully. locally, white should extend at A.
[jeff] good
[jeff] please consider the sequence following white at C8.
[jeff] this move caused black to creep into white's lower left territory. white should have instead descended at B7.
[jeff] white should play at A instead. please consider the consequences of black playing there in response to A4.
[jeff] white should play at A, B, or C to keep the lower left stones alive.
[jeff] white at A is shicho. black cannot escape.
[jeff] this move is ineffectual as black's stones in this region are already alive.
[jeff] please consider white at A or B.
KKGO: sorry drafonis [19k?]: np
[jeff] it seems as if white was overly concerned with the life of this group. this move could have been played elsewhere. white can still make life by playing on any of the marked points.
[jeff] continuing at P18 would have been more effective for white. S15 invites S16.
[jeff] ineffectual. white should be concerned with making life within black's territory.
I resigned at this point, as black had too great a lead (my only territory was the left-side bunch).
Avi: This is not exactly like the joseki (C17) but eventually the standard pattern was achieved. prana: C14 is possible too. Normally, w answers this move with w D13. Then b C17
Avi: Here White deviated also from the joseki - could I have punished him for tenuki? prana: w tenuki is strange. b Q16 is not weak, so you don't have to defend.  What about b D13? Makes you thick on the left side.  Thus, you can better fight on the upper side later...
prana: c17 is a big move. But since there is already a w stone on K17, I personally would prefer b d13
Avi: I thought I should stablized by group even in gote - was I right? prana: No, I think this is wrong. You are already alive in the corner. Thus, catching 1 stone is rather pointless (you are overconcentrated).  w is happy, because he is getting stronger outside (sabaki).
Avi: Is this sequence too early? prana: as long as w answers, its okay.
prana: w heavy
w too slow
prana: This looks a bit heavy. I recommend to play more lightly.
Avi: Please comment about this - I may have pressed the top before G7? prana: G7 is solid. I like it. First, strengthen yourself, then attack.
Avi: Now White feel comfortable at the top and I feel a bit behind. prana:Maybe you are a few points behind. But I dont think it really matters.  a) You can continue normally with J11 e.g. b) Also a testing move b K15 looks interesting. How will w answer? Will he defend or attack?
Avi: So I decided to play a bit more aggressive. prana: Instead of invading, consider reducing. B can build a moyo too. B m17 is very deep in whites moyo.  What happens after w O17? If b gets captured, then its a BIG loss! Often invasions gain a little, but risk a lot.
prana: better atari
prana: Too slow!
prana: b is happy now.
prana: Better cut.
b: iken tobi is easier
Avi: White's cut has given Black a target for attack, but I could not get too much out of it prana: Yes, I agree, w cut is probably overplay.  But as you before, w feels now behind and tries something...
prana: I think, this is wrong direction, because G10 group is not that strong. Better cut.
Avi: I had to take car of my G10 group prana: OK, but G5 looks a bit strange.
prana: bad result for b. w makes profit and b is not really alive
Avi: Is O3 immediately better? prana: yes, much better. The exchange is strengthening w and doesnt help b.
prana: You were lucky to play here first! But locally, better play shape move at e2.
prana: Jumping is just endgame. It doesnt make eyes...
prana: b is still dead.
prana: w was nice.
prana: don't push w from behind into your moyo.
prana: aji keshi. Now, you lost the possibility of cutting at F8
prana: too small. Only 2p.  Try to estimate (or count) the values of the marked points: A  B C D E
Avi: I think at this point that White has a significant lead. The rest is mostly yose. I appreciate your comments on the yose too.  Thanks a lot for you help! Avi  prana: You are welcome! It was an interesting game and a pleasure to replay it.
Zam : Not usual ... and slow.  White muse reduce black's inflence ... a good spot is the triangle.
Zam : I would still play closer
Zam : Black is looking for trouble ... but this is playable
PM:  I would have preferred F3 here, I was pretty sure I could shut white into that corner .  Zam : with this move, black can still attack/get  the corner.  ... It is usual response and works well with C11
PM:  Right direction for both of us?  I was betting that white would answer in the corner giving me the opprotunity to follow up with a 2-space extension.  Zam : this is a safe way to play! Since white just "copied"  your opening moves, you are not behind.  This move makes the corner white ... but this shape has a weakness.
PM:  Running to the center odd here?  Zam : Making a moyo ... and if you try to invade, he can take advantage of the weak group ... so this is not a bad move.
PM:  Would C15 have been bigger?  I wanted to strengthen what I thought was the weakest stone on the board.  Zam : This move is not bad since it defends and attacks.  White defends, so this is good.
Zam : This feels slow, but black is ahead ... and this is pushing white to will to get into black's game  Since White played B4, the black shape is not as strong as before.  If I were white, I would have taken advantage of it to make white stronger (see var)
Zam : This is  not a good move at all.  It threatends noting, is covers nothing.  See var  White should try between : - making a bigger moyo - reducing black while building something
PM:  Seeing white's three stones on the third line along the top, I figured I would use this as an opprotunity to keep white confined while building a huge center moyo, I figure attacks on white's southwest group would keep me ahead of the land grab from that end.  Zam : I do not really like this move since it is purely territorrial.  But you are still ahead ... Don't forget that the center is not black yet ... and that you just gave white a corner
Zam : This does not secures white territory
PM:  I had actually planned this out, is there a better way to keep white limited to the top?  Zam : This feels good to fulfill yours plans of keeping white at the top.  But this is gote.  I would have played at the triangle.   White has to reduce now black !
Zam : threatens noting.  Purely territorial.  Slow !!!
Zam : running into white's strengh is not good
Zam : White should have played J18
PM:  I'm not sure why I played this move, I think this was a case of "Sente for Sente's sake", I figured white would need two moves to deal with this stone, on the west and the east.
PM:  "Hane at the head of two stones" must apply here too, I figured.  Zam : Hane at three is good.  Hane here is maybe not the best.  Why not end what you started ? it is big AND sente !  Se var
Zam : white could cut
PM:  This was a move inspired by looking at a kifu of "the ear reddening game", I forget who played.  Zam : White is so small !  Black si so strong.  White has to invade strongly ....
Zam : white HAS to get into black's moyo.  Do not defend when you are behind !
Zam : gote ... only few points.
Zam : Bigger than H5
Zam : Finally !
Zam : Gote.
Zam : Better Get a stone
Zam : small
Zam : White moves are not doing much.
Zam : No territory to gain here. ..
PM:  Unnessisary?  Zam : yes, but if you fear invasion, but since you are  ahead, you can play it.
Nick [?]: I guess we'll just see how you do..
amzolt [?]: ok Nick [?]: ...and I'll give advice as we go amzolt [?]: ok
Nick [?]: I see you played the 5-3 for your firswt move
amzolt [?]: yeah, thought I'd try it Nick [?]: cool
I'm guessing you're just experimenting around here, but this isn't a good move.  Look at how close your two white stones are, you aren't creating a lot of influence.  Also, they're so close to the side of the board that you aren't creating much territory.  The 5-3 starting point move usually focuses on gaining influence.  I've posted some of the more common moves in this situation with triangles.  Look at a Joseki Dictionary for more details.
I don't like this move.  That white stone is far too easily cut off from its support base.  Black now gets to attack both your stones on the left and right, keeping you on the defensive.
Nick [?]: I see you are not following the Nick method
Nick [?]: may I give one piece of advice? amzolt [?]: just "havin' fun"
amzolt [?]: server seems slow
C15 is probably a safer bet. Unless you were trying to start a fight here I recommend you do that instead.
This move doesn't have much purpose, I recommend building territory instead.
Go up instead.  Your connected well to the bottom stones, so you want to work instead on connecting with Q10.
I'm not sure what you're doing here with this move.  What I recommend doing right here is strengthening you D10 and D13 stones, so that you can build territory in the upper left middle.
You're not thinking big enough here.  All this does is gain you a few points in the top left.  Make a more important move here.
You're in good shape here.  What you need to do now is focus on killing F17, and then you'll have lots of territory up top, as well as plenty of influence to start attacking the bottom.
You lost focus here.  You need to keep attacking his stones up top.
Nick [?]: I just got done scrubbing the kitchen floor
amzolt [?]: hmmm Nick [?]: It's good to take a rest!
amzolt [?]: oops Nick [?]: you want to take it back?
amzolt [?]: no
I would suggest N14 at this point.  Your Q15 group is connected well enough to Q13 so you don't really need the move you made.  N14 will help connect your two top groups, and keep black's top right group from moving into the middle.
Nick [?]: Ah, the ever popular ladder
Wait to make this move for later in the game.  Right now you have the initiative, so make a bigger move.
It seems to me at this point in the game you were unsure how to proceed.  This move right here does little to attack black or build territory.    Look at the area that I have marked with squares.  This should be your focus, you need to start surrounding it, with a mvoe like G15.    Watch what black does for the next few moves.  He is building territory on the bottom part of the screen.  Observe how he does it, and try to apply it to your own games.
See how much territory he secured with just those two moves?
Nick [?]: I would say the first part of the game is over
amzolt [?]: you'd know better than I Nick [?]: So, I am now using middle-game tactics
Nick [?]: It is important to know when the beginning part ends and the middle part starts
amzolt [?]: ok amzolt [?]: I think I may have lost the middle but I really can't tell
Nick [?]: you are quickly losing the middle
This stone right here is far too isolated from your main groups.  Not only are you going to lose it, but you're going to let black build up his groups in the process.
amzolt [?]: oops, havin' fun now Nick [?]: The problem with your group in the middle was that they were not connected to anything
Nick [?]: We are quickly coming to the end of the middle game
It looks like you are cut off, but you can save your group with D11, see my variation.
Don't bother with this move, you aren't building territory or denying black much by doing it.  A move like M1 is better.
Nick [?]: We are now in the end-game phase amzolt [?]: ok
Here are 2 areas that I thought you were weak in.  First you would overplay your stones.  You'd play a stone too far from its support base.  When you're playing near your opponent, try and be more conservative next time, until you find the right balance.  Second, you need to focus in on what is the most important move at any given moment.  Take your time when playing, look all over the board for moves, and then compare those moves, trying to figure out how important each one is.  If you do this, you'll learn how to develop an overall strategy for each game you play.  Send me an email: makubesu@gmail.com if you have any questions and good luck! ------------ amzolt [?]: I think I should resign Nick [?]: yes Nick [?]: you did well Nick [?]: but you need a little more strategy amzolt [?]: I need I little more everythin ;-O Nick [?]: Hopefully, as time goes by, you can pick up more ideas Nick [?]: Let me know when you want som advice
CZR: This is not a standard move (corner would be), but neither is it a *bad* move.  I would still prefer the corner to the side though.
CZR: White takes advantage of the open corner.
CZR: I think you chose the wrong side of the corner to play on simply because both black and white now face the left hand side and it is white's turn.  Moving in the marked area looks better to me because a move at the bottom of the board is then a natural follow-up.
CZR: White is the first to move, and naturally stakes out the larger portion of the side.
CZR: And you are left with the smaller portion.
CZR: This exchange is bad.
CZR: White should simply ignore you and play elsewhere (see branch).
Was this a wasted move?  CZR: Yes, you have too many stones all doing the same thing (which is not good in the opening).  See branch.
CZR: This move looks to make a moyo in the upper right.  I'm not qualified to say where the best move is at this point, but this one has a good idea motivating it.
CZR: White secures his corner.
You should be more agressive here and approach q4.
CZR: Same commend as last time.
CZR: I like q6 better.  It is a natural distance from both black stones above and the white stone below, and it flattens white out.  Now white can take a large corner with a play around r6.
CZR: I made my last comment without looking at this move :)  Really.
CZR: Usually, don't touch (attack) your opponents stone if you want to contain them --- especially when you are not playing from strength.  White takes advantage and pushes out over you.
CZR: I don't understand this move.
CZR: There are bigger moves, but you have the right idea in that you are trying to take more than your opponent.  Something along L appeals to me, it takes more advantage of your other stones.
CZR: White says "thank you" after this move, because he gets to make a move he wants to make anyway.
CZR: If there was some possibility of invading the upper left, it is much smaller after the last two exchanges.
CZR: This move doesn't accomplish anything that nearby stones are not already doing.
CZR: This move shows the right intent, it is just too little too late.
What is the best way for this fight to go? (56-75)
Did I hane on the wrong side? I thought it would be better to push white to the top were I was strong.  CZR: In the opening, C5 is correct.  It will be hard to kill white, a defensive move would have been in order to pre-empt this (think of a move to defend the corner instead of d8).  I don't think you can keep white out of the corner, so I think it is correct to play c5.
CZR: This is too much.  See branch.
Would C5 have been better?  CZR: See earlier variations.  I'll end the comments here as this was the last major exchange and the game looks to be lost.
xdx [14k]: hello GonoIro [14k]: hi GonoIro [14k]: gg
xdx [14k]: you too!
Beh: Other possible moves A-D, just to name a few...
Beh: White plays the Low Chinese Opening. The Chinese Opening is more commonly played by Black.
Beh: Better to protect at A immediately.
Beh: Too low, better at A.
Beh: To invade Whites framework would be another possibility as the Chinese Opening is all about invasion from the opponent. Not invading would normally lead to a big moyo.
Beh: Both Black and White are trying to build big moyos.
Beh: Dangerous to ingnore Blacks invasion. Black could effort to lose one stone...
Beh: I think A would be better.
Beh: Not much of a threat. Better to play elsewhere.
Beh: Why not cut directly?
Beh: Good move. It reduces Blacks possibility to expand while it helps White to a big moyo.
Beh: An earlier invasion would have been better.
Beh: Not good as it is no threat.
Beh: Not necessary. See variations.
Beh: Not necessary, White can't play at A. This way you end in gote.
Beh: Wrong side, see variations.
Beh: Better to play A, see variations on move 110.
Beh: Good.
xdx [14k]: well played
GonoIro [14k]: yeah GonoIro [14k]: thx GonoIro [14k]: but you too
Beh: Better to play A first as White is reducing his ko threats.
Beh: Better to play A directly.
Beh: Not necessary, see variations.
Beh: Better at A.
Beh: Better at A, as it has the same effect and connects.
Beh: Not necessary, miai with A.
Beh: Better to play elsewhere as it gains no points or reduce Whites territory.
Beh: Good.
Beh: Black ignores the possible threat.
xdx [14k]: nice, neither of us has captured a stone GonoIro [14k]: yeah^^ xdx [14k]: this has been a great game, no dumb mistakes GonoIro [14k]: but you have got one on the top^^ GonoIro [14k]: yeah^^
Beh: Very good, the marked stones are in grave danger now.
Beh: Black only has one weak ko threat at A which White would probably ingnore...
Good move!
good again
This should have been G5 perhaps?  f5 is to close to you wall. I made two suggestions.
I think this must be an overplay, creating another weak group, but really don't see anything severe to punish.  By the way: this move is neather big nor urgent. A and B are the urgent moves, C, D, E and F the big moves.
The result is still ok for white. The six marked black stones don not do more work than the six marked white ones.  Black lost sente and all he got was a smal corner. W ist leading here! You punished the overplay.
to mild
The situation is still fine for white. black has gained two small corners, (20 Points) but nothing more.  You are right in assuming that you could have punished b harder for his overplays. But in general you made usefull moves and overplays cannot win over usefull moves. White has a lot of potential near A to make up for the secure points b has.
I dont like this move even if it threatens to kill black. Whenever you play a move like this, make sure it does kill. If you only get a ko here, it is better to play tenuki to begin with. If you are not sure if it kills, play tenuki too.  However this is not the loosing move.
As always, he takes the biggest point and ignores all my moves. But here S5 doesn't kill, so I should have played here first.  Even if you can kill now, you have gained about 30 points in two moves (s5 and s2 for killing make 21 points +9 points lost by black). Each move was worth 15 points. This is big but black can probably still tenuki, finding other moves near that value.
this move is always bad in this shape.
Horrible! This is pure endgame.
almost all other moves are better.  The game is now over, but his has nothing to do with you answer to the black overplay. Again, this move is not even especialy big if it would threaten to kill black!
Why leave a cutting point?
Well, from what I learned, it should be a bad thing to leave weak groups and tenuki. "Play urgent before big" after all. Was this not the case in this game? Should I change my style to take big points instead of defending? Please, help me find an answer, so that I can improve.  There is no need to change your style. Just take big points bevore small endgame and play shape points instead of meaningless conections. Apart from that the key to getting shodan is practicing live and death.  have fun with the review and with playing go! I hope I was able to help a little. Feel free to ask questions about the review.
Reviewer:  I would rather see O16 then O17.  When I look a the board I see 5 black stones and 1 white stone.  White has approached at R14 and is affecting 3 stones.  Q16, K10, and Q4, QK10 the least and Q16 the most.  Q4 use to have a connection to Q16 and now it doesn't.  K10's connection to Q16 is weakened.  Q16 used to have a connection to Q4 and now it doesn't and the connection to K10 is weakened.  Q16 has the added benefit of being able to live on the side or in the corner.  So how do we decide what to do?  Clearly we need to help Q16 it is the weakest stone on the board.  An observation I have made in games is that no matter what  the strength of the players-- the one with the least number of connected groups on the board wins.  Rarely do I see anything other than that.   Re-enforcing that concept is that fact that the player with the least number of connected groups has been the most efficient at living.  Let's look at what white is doing.  R14 is cutting Q16 off from Q4 and weakening the connection to K10.  O16 strengthens the connection to K10 better than O17.  More on this concept as I review.
Reviewer:  R6 weakens the connection of Q4 to K10 and makes a weak connection to R14.  This connection is weakened by K10.
Reviewer:  I would rather see O4 as this re-enforces Q4 connection to K10 better thatn O3  If Black plays at R10, then white has two groups on the board, while Black still has 1 connected group.  See variation
Blue: I've seen this a lot in handicaps but Q10 is usual. Is P10 valid or can I take advantage of it?  Reviewer: This move is consistent.  Yes Q10 is usual, but this is a weaker version with the same idea.  P10 interfers with K10's influence on the R6 and R14 stones.  If Black was at O16 and O4, White would be in severe trouble playing a move like this.  There seem to be no stones interfering with Whites connection, so yes white can play this way.
Reviewer: Good move -- Seperate White into groups
Reviewer -- Attach to stones makes them stronger as well as your own, if you don't care if they get stronger then attach, otherwise don't touch.   White should have gone P6 to intimidate Black and give the illusion that black is being seperated.
Reviewer this allows white to connect his groups
Blue: Here I'm fighting, but I'm not entirely sure what for. To separate P10, possibly, but also to keep an inroad to the side to reduce his territory. Neither succeeded and in hindsight neither was a particularly good goal. What should I have been doing?  Reviewer: White's mistake has helped black recover.
Reviewer:: Keep white seperated -- see variation
Reviewer: Something has to go now :(
Reviewer: very bad exchange -- this is a huge lose.  See the variation
Reviewer: I'll assume this wasn an emotional response -- It does no good at all
Reviewer White is very stron in the lower right, now whit tries to break off another group
Good
Blue: I've never seen this before. What is the best response? Mine didn't work so well.  Reviewer this is an asking move. -- Push him into the corner or outside your choice.  the outside is more valuable right now
Black has already lost
wBlue: THis big move hurt me badly. How could I have prevented it? Responded to it? What part and how much of this area am I actually trying to turn into territory?  Not much to learn from the game now -- White has won
Blue: Obviously this was bad.
Blue: I would have thought his position was too weak for a monkey jump. Evidently not? Is there a correct response in this situation?
Blue: This attack. Is it standard? Presumably it's very preventable. How to respond?  Too many weaknesses to prevent it
Blue: Didn't realise this wasn't connected.
Flameinice [3k]: hi
I was thinking of closing the corner at d3 but I remembered the saying 'do not let your opponent close two corners' and so approached D16. Was this okay?  BB: Yes. A move like c5 emphasises the left side. It's like saying to Black, you can have the corner, but I'm going to get a big left side. Of course, by this logic, it's already out of place, because Black has the top left corner. And also Black's stone in the top left is on 4-4, which is settled, so here you could actually enclose that bottom left corner. In summary, I don't think c5 was great.
BB: This is a fun move by Black. He could start a really interesting fight by invading the left side, and he has no weakness to worry about - the bottom right is strong and the top left is very light.
BB: Nice. Now you have a flexible side. c4 can only be captured at great cost (many moves).
BB: Boring! The bottom right is settled, and low, the top right is settled enough. This is big, but by no means urgent. The top side on the other hand, is interesting. A white move at h17 puts Black under a lot of pressure. A black move at l17 defends, attacks, and is big. The top is urgent. You should now play at l17 or h17. L17 is good because Black pretty much has to play the inefficient move of j17.
BB: I think this goes a little too far. If Black responds h17, fine, but otherwise you haven't *really* put pressure on Black (not like h17 would), and this way you've left room for Black to invade (m17 + o17 makes a base).
BB: Oh my god. Boring! Black is low on this side! If Black want to ignore the top left, the best way is either r14 of e4. For you now, I would suggest c17 or e4/d3. Or perhaps r14.
Should I have played D3 instead? I was afraid of black's development and so played this first.  BB: Yes, this is a little thin. A pro might be able to pull it off, but only because he could read the next 50 moves. There's no territory in the centre, so what are you trying to achieve? You can't attack k3, obviously. And if you want to attack the top left, wasting a move here is... a waste of a move. Just attack if you want to attack.
BB: Black has the right idea here. The corner has been ripe for the taking. That said, like I said before: attack this stone now to make a wall facing the left side. I think e4 is urgent.
I did not see d5 until it was too late.  BB: Tesuji smesuji! Black simply has too much space to live. He doesn't have another weak group around, and there is k3 which definitely offers support. See variation.
How to continue from here?  BB: I don't know. You're the one who got into this mess. Okay, I'm just kidding. Let's think strategically (you sure don't want to try to kill Black because your territory will be decimated)...  You don't want to let f3 die on a big scale. One goal should be to get reasonably strong on both sides while keeping Black weak. This would be an asset for you...  You can't let c5 dies, because then Black will be strong, and so you will be weak on both sides...  You could potentially let Black live in gote, get strong on both sides and then attack the top left...  Locally, d6 seems like the obvious move....
BB: I was thinking c4. Even if you want to connect here, c6 is the right way. This way, Black c4 is *much* better. See var.
BB: What does this do? Black is strong on both sides.
BB: Should be at r14. Black has invasion potential in the top right.
Run out at O8 instead?  BB: The thing about a forcing move (q9) is that you can let it get captured and it still costs you nothing. You don't want to invade here, you want to reduce. If you want to invade, try s4.This move is just asking to be captured on a large scale. You already have weak stones on the bottom side. Black should play a move m6, which threatens both sides.
BB: See variation. This isn't the best move by Black. It's too close to his own strength above. White m6 would be good now.
BB: Again, this just asks Black to capture you on a large scale.
BB: NO! Black should play at m6!
BB: Now you've got coherence, if not connection.
BB: Not a good exchange.
BB: See var.
Another mistake, but my opponent either chose to let me go or didn't see it. I'd feel bad if it were the former.
From black 71 onwards I didn't feel as though there was a lot of pressure on me, mainly because of the cut at L7, which my opponent was driving me to.
Flameinice [3k]: thx achdec [4k]: sorry but you are not playing go Flameinice [3k]: bye    My opponent resigned here. In spite of the fact that I'm prone to attack and black's moyo could expand with attacking I feel as if I'm leading here. Can you please a.) give me a rough count of territory, b.) tell me how to improve my play and c.) tell me whether or not I was 'playing go'. I know I shouldn't let comments get to me, but I've never had someone tell me this before and am a little shaken by the bluntness. I'd greatly appreciate your views.    Thanks for reviewing,  Flameinice  BB: Q a) You'd get a lot more out of my answer to this question if you answered it first. In fact, I suggest before even reading my answer, you try to answer it and the see where your answer differs from mine.  Black has territory in the bottom right and bottom left. White has territory on the left and top.  Black's lower left, assuming W b5 in sente and e2 in sente, 6 points.  Black's lower right, assuming White o2, o3, p1 and t5, 12 points.  White's left side, assuming reduction from around d12, plus Black b5, b6, b7, b15, 13 points.  White's top side, assuming reduction from both sides and above, 4 points.  Top left and top right don't count because either could be invaded at the 3-3 point. Which is just another way of saying it's not the endgame yet and neither player should be resigning.  But from this little analysis that I can achieve, it looks like W has 17 point and B has 18 points. Which also makes it look like no one should be resigning yet.  Black should either play c16, if he thinks he's ahead, or r17, if he thinks he's behind.  Q b) Recognise the meaning of moves like c5.  Recognise that a move halfway between two good moves is often worse than either. Examples are k17, which was too far away from Black to attack, but too far away from White to be secure. Also q6, which was too deep to be reduction, but not deep enough to be invasion, and so in the end you had to try to live without a base.  Make sure your moves have a meaning. h4 saved one stone without threatening anything, and left a great weakness that Black could use by playing h6.  Play away from strength: e.g. r13 was too close to Black's strong stones. r14 would secure the top right better. Especially given the thinness around o17.  Make solid connections when you have support and can't be attacked. c7 should be at c6.  Q c) Get over it. I suggest getting a friend or just someone you know to insult you for 5 minutes or so as practice, and just ignore everything they say.  I always just tell myself I honestly thought I was doing the best I could, and that's good enough for me. If I suck, it's because I suck, and that's not my fault. Or if it *is* my fault, at least I'm *trying* to do something about it.
grosnez [2k]: hello snowcar [2k]: hi grosnez [2k]: have a nice game
snowcar [2k]: gg
g3 probably shouldn't be ignored.....
I didn't find D4 in Joseki, and not sure how to response to that move.   *this IS a joseki
this is NOT joseki  proper move is at b4
Is the result at left bottom cornor acceptable for both B and W?
this move is strange better to seal in W i think  or...at the very least...use better spacing on bottom (see 2nd variation)
Is there a better move to help Q9 and the right top corner?  YES!
this move is odd.  it encourages w to play d6 area as well as d12 area and make double-wing formation in top left.  maybe you're thinking of them as something like miai...i guess i'll see how it plays out.  the squared point is also getting to be quite large.
hmmm....w seems to be gaining momentum and b has left lots of weaknesses behind (open top right corner, b7 connection, q10 cut, etc).
bad move for w instead. w should just develop outside thickness
this way of playing would be more effecting if m5 significantly weakens w's right group.
It took me quite long time to select a good point here, and get no answer indeed. Finally put K14 based on my basic feeling. What should be kept in mind when handling this kind of situations?  k14 is both aimless and very complex.  I'm not sure how it will play out.  but...first i will say that this type of move kills a lot of aji at the top (remember you don't want w to solidify the top becaue you have several invasion points).  Furthermore, it starts to attack the k10 group but it seems like it is too far and k10 will have an easy time due to a lack of pressure.
this move is bad idea.  if you really want to do something over here, why not q18?
w is happy to let you capture a stone while he makes shape in the middle
w is alive now.  do remember that w k2 also makes an eye!
not sure what you're thinking  a much better idea is in the variation.
overplay?
bad shape...and now the d16 cutting stone is useless
I think the result at the left top corner is a fail to Black. Actually if white continue moves at c13 or c12, black gains nothing here. How to handle it better?  see the d18 probe idea
good timing
Here I didn't notice the importance of the left side.
This is unfortunate....very large moves.
B is still in it....   End of comments.
is this move common? which follow-ups? or what would be better?  This is a normal move in this corner situation, I will show you some standart joseki. But I can'T tell wether this is good or bad here for sure, because I haven't seen this opening before. I think this is quite even, if both play correctly, but I am far from professional judging.  The other move would be san-san to take the corner, but is a bad idea here immo.
all right?
This move is bad as long as white does not have a stone around K16
is this a proper joseki?  Usually you see Q6 beeing played on R6, but it doesn't make as much of a difference, except for black getting some weakness here when he plays Q6
Playing the low move seems more appropriate here, because black can grind in there really easily otherwise.
what about that move? I though getting outside would be a good idea...  See my comment in two moves.
White should not have played here, sacrificing that stone doesn't seem like much of a loss.
Still the right side is bigger
good  White should have not played the kakari but played on the right side instead.
block the right side?  I would consider this neither right nor wrong side, the problem you got was the follow-up.
You pay 2 moves while you give white a base, to fix the p16 weakness, which is much smaller than the 2 moves you gave away.
should i better protect the upper left group? in order to prevent h17  No, you should not be too afraid of that move. Developing and protecting the right side moyo is crucial. You are in this situation due to the P17 mistake, which was the initial error.
acceptable result for black?
for me this one seemed to be a splendid move!  I don't think so. This move appears to be too high. You should only reduce when you are ahead, but you are behind in this game quite obviously.  You have to consider the black stones on the upper side to be weak. Which will damage your right side as well when whtie attacks in the proper way.
This move seems strange
to small?  No, this is satisfactory for white, because you could have given much more damage to white.
So both of you consider this stones dead at this point?
You should not have tenukied on this move.
any comments to the last moves`? ...i think i lost a lot of territory on the right because i failed to destroy the aji of r14
This move seems strange as well. White will probably live there, but this is way too passive. Make him fight, to live there. He is inside YOUR territory.
Move 100 no more comments from this points. Your major mistakes happened trough the opening. You should work on your basic understanding of the game. Such as weak and strong groups. All in all, you made few mistakes in the rest of the game. At least thats my impression from looking at the rest quickly.
Finn Thomsen Nielsen: Ups, I didn't calculate that correctly... :-(
Nikolai Bubb: hope so... i was a little afraid
[EV] Good move, preventing W from making a perfect framework.  W has played wide extensions, deliberately inviting this invasion, so he must hope to profit by attacking.  So far the game looks even.
[EV] Let's pause to evaluate.  It is hard to actually count the score at this stage, but we can look at shape and efficiency.  Both sides look fine, with no wasted or out-of-place moves.  The B group in the upper left is a little weak, but should not get into too much trouble, and B has right side potential as compensation.
Was this correct?  [EV] This move is a good way to secure the B group, but it loses points and ends in gote.  I think I would secure the upper right corner at A or make the first move on the bottom at B instead.  It does not look like W has a severe attack here.
[EV] W could go all the way to R17 to take the corner.  Splitting W is not an attractive option for B in this position, as the resulting wall will be useless, so the joseki shown in the variation is likely.  Still, sente is valuable now, so this move is also reasonable.  Maybe best is to play directly on the bottom, leaving both options open here.  W will not be too unhappy if B gets the first move in this corner, as the group to the left is too strong to be affected.
[EV] This move looks a little inefficient to me -- there is not much potential territory above, and the moyo below is still quite open.  I prefer either of the marked moves, A to expand the moyo (even though W has a good response at P10 where B just played) or B to break up the W lower side.
[EV] B could consider blocking on the outside, letting W live in the corner, in order to make a nice moyo and keep sente.  I think I prefer that option, but it is probably just a matter of taste.
[EV] This seems too easy on W.  Better I think to just play Q4 and let W struggle to live or escape.
Just R7 instead of O4?  [EV] This W move is a little heavy and slow.  W has already broken up the B side, even if B captures another stone or two, so running out fast and light with something like P6 or O5 or Q7 seems appropriate.    [EV] O4 looks like a necessary B response after W connects.  B wants to attack the entire W group.  There is no hurry to peep at R7, since W cannot make two eyes by playing there first.  In fact, B can cut at R6 to make a lot of territory (P10 breaks the ladder), so peeping now is aji-keshi.
[EV] Very bad, wrong direction.  Taking care of the weak W group is much more important than making a few points on the bottom.
[EV] Could B attack strongly at the vital point P6? See variation for a few moves of the possible continuation.
[EV] Good timing, now that B can no longer cut.
[EV] But keep this move in reserve.  The exchange helps W run out, and W has no way to make shape here if ithis move is omitted.
[EV] Aji-keshi, helps W more than B.  Moves like this are OK if they make profit while attacking, but here the B shape above the weak W group is thin, and this stone will be poorly placed once W escapes.
[EV] J4 or G4 is better style if B wants to press W low.  G3 or H3 is worth considering if B likes fighting.
[EV] Too direct.  Avoid contact plays normally when attacking, as they tend to strenghten both sides, which is not what the attacking side wants.  Simply N10 looks better.
[EV] This move does not make much more territory than B already earned here.  I prefer G4 or (with hindsight) B11.
Should I have defended here before?  [EV] B11 would have been nice at some point, but  B should still be OK here.
Would C7 have been better?  [EV] B9 or B6 are fine, since W cannot cut in either case.  Hard to choose.  D11 might be good timing, since W answers are constrained while B still has both B9 and B6 miai.
[EV] B could fight back more strongly with a double-hane or even a cut.  Try reading out some variations and see if you agree.  Note that B has D11 sente if needed.
[EV]
[EV] Last of the large endgame points.  W is slightly ahead now.  [EV] Looking at the result on the lower left quadrant of the board, B got little or nothing from his running attack on the W group starting in the lower right.  B made maybe 20 extra points around M13, but W solidified a similar territory around G2.  I suggest attacking a little less directly and looking for other opportunities during pauses in the attack.
Would ko have been better for me?  [EV] It looks like B is a few points behind, and B does have a lot of ko threats, so yes ko would have been a good final try for a win.  No further comments.
DT - Here is the question: in which direction should Black attack R10?   I know that the most *common* way is to play R8, but it may be also an *old* way.  I'm asking this because there are many *recent* pro games (2005-2008) in witch Black plays R12.  I could not find the answer to this problem, so I decided to send this question to GTL.  See variations, if you want to know what I found in "Get strong at attaking" (but please note that Get strong at attaking is kind of old too...)  The question is in the air :-)  It's my intention to understand the theory behind Black's R12 move (*drives White toward Black's strong position?*). If "Get strong at attaking" says it's the wrong direction, why are pros playing it now?  DC: the only explaination from my perspective is that it is a matter of the white group being made to feel uncomfortable with the r8, r13,r15 variation. Since this is deemed good for black White now tends to extend to r14 after r8, playing one of the very many variations arising from this flexible way of playing.   This has been my focus in this brief fuseki review, also relying heavily on Lee Chang haos publication on the new moves new shapes. R8 Definatley seems the correct direction by principle and the only explaination I can Theorise upon for a few deviatios, is possibly the avoidance of complications arrising from the stil developmental lines that result from the R14 extension.
DT - This extension is played because "the distance from the small knight enclosure is perfect" and...
DT - ... "R15 put severe pressure on White's stones."   "Later Black will aim to enclose the corner with N17."   This words are from "Get strong at attaking".
hlx: Alright, so it's a 6 stone handicap game.  While your opponent is significantly stronger, you have been given a huge advantage to offset that, so the plan is to utilize what you have been given to full effect.
hlx: Safer to just connect at R16 here. (See branch)
hlx: This move was a mistake, against someone stronger they will punish with something like the following.
hlx Don't be afraid to push out more and gain more territory, instead of playing at p11 you could play at o11 still for more gain.
hlx: Taking the hoshi points (big points, also known as star points, the bolded circles) are important in the early game.   The general rule of thumb is:  1. Respond to any immediate threats  2. Take big points  the term "big" means that you will gain the most by taking them, k4 was a good move.
moshes: I think this move was a mistake - I should have gone back to the contact fight and played o14 (or p16?)   hlx: This move was not a mistake, quite the contrary. It was quite good. This extension from the corner secures more territory for you while putting pressure on the k16 stone.
moshes: This move was also a mistake.  I should have gone to H16 instead, this was over-aggressive.     hlx: You are correct, A was the correct response to this move.
moshes: a mistake, I should have gone to J15 and then continued attacking k16.   J15 and attacking K16 are not what's essential here.  G17 was a mistake, it should have been played at G18. Follow the branch.
moshes: I miscounted liberties... this one should have been played on J15   hlx: this move was fine, I will now explain a concept to you that plagued me up until I had teaching.  You do not have to fight everything. The concept of the game is not to kill the opponents stones.  The concept of the game is to stake claim to the most territory possible, capturing only gains two points per stone.  Where as , a strategic move could gain you like ten points per move! Do not try to kill everything, as it will make oyu weak and let your opponent push you around.
hlx: This move is laright, youre pushing in on white, however you are in danger of being cut up at A, so play at B right now would seem necessary.
hlx: As expected, white cuts in
moshes: if I had played J15 earlier I could have ignored this attack and played elsewhere... like D or E17  hlx: Even if J15 had been played, a move like this cannot be ignored. He is crawling into your territory and costing you points along the way. This threat must be stopped.
hlx: The proper response to this move is at A. You do not wan him to squeeze down and split those groups apart.
hlx: This move is not the immediate threat, this will gain you two points. White's stone at A is pushing into your territory, and if left is doing a move that is called:  Squeezing the toothpaste. He is pushing through two of your stones and flooding through, splitting them apart. You want to avoid this at all cost.
moshes: bad shape... I knew it but felt I had no choice.  Maybe I should have sacrificed the stone and played E15?   hlx: E15 would not have been proper in this situation, you are cut and will be in danger of losing the group if you do not connect at A, and then jump out of the area to try to live. Follow continuation from last move.
moshes: should maybe have played C11 instead, or even E13  hlx: This move was proper later on in the game, in my opinion. This move maintains solid connection, avoids problems.   You would play this game closer to endgame, when territory is decided already, you have much bigger moves on the board, which are marked.   D, would be jumping the large dead group out and attempting to make life, I'm honestly not sure if it can be done at this point but id played right you could connect out. Follow:
hlx: At this point you are following him around the board, letting him pick and choose what territory he wants to make and what groups to kill.  You need to be proactive and be in the mindset of what's best for you, not just constant fighting the immediate stones.   at this point it would appear the top group is sealed in with little hope at life, so lets not continue beating that dead body, let's focus on more important points.  You could take any of the following right now:  A, B, C  Any of these moves will be very profitable for you and put you ahead in points.  While you are given six handicap stones, you must not take htem for granted.  Play every game like its the final of a major tournament.
hlx: Beating a dead horse, see previous comment.
hlx: Here, a mistake by white will allow you to cut him. You have a chance to bring this group back to life, it may be small, but follow:
moshes: a mistake, I should have gone for N13 first. This one is really frustrating to me.  hlx: see previous branch. This move gains you nothing, as putting those stones in atari will simply cause him to solidly connect.
moshes [23k?]: sorry if I'm a bit slow, I'm still new...  yeah I think I was realizing I had just missed an opportunity... so at this point, was there any way for me to save all those stones in the middle without taking major risks on the sides, or was it too late?   hlx: At this current point, it would seem you are sealed in, however if you go back to the previous branch I show you a way to take it back.  And no worries, you are doing fine for your kyu level, you are doing the right thing by getting your games reviewed, it's the best way to learn.
hlx: play at A if you are going to follow him, push him outwards, you make more territory.
hlx: again, A
hlx: White is trying to break up your stones! You must respond, you cannot play elsewhere at the moment. Follow continuation
moshes: stupid.  I was daydreaming I guess.  hlx: Seems like it :P this is what's called "Self-Atari" you should never do it, only in more advanced cases (see life and death problems) refer to previous branch.
hlx: Touching a single stone only makes it stronger. Play at A instead.
moshes: I'm not sure about this one... should I have gone farther out?  hlx: A would have been a better response, this seems too slow.
hlx: Again, too slow, moving one step at a time doesn't gain you as much as you should.
moshes: was there any way I could have prevented this?
hlx: good job on protecting the cut!
hlx: Here, white is going to try to make a base in the corner to secure two eyes, your job is to prevent this, I would play at R2 here. Continuation.
moshes: a mistake, I should have protected at s5 I think
moshes [23k?]: oops :)
hlx: Protecting the corner from another invasion, good move.
hlx: This move is unnecessary, each time you play into your own territory without a white stone being played in there first will cost you a point.
moshes: I think this was a mistake.  I should have gone to o1, then used H7 as a ko threat.  I didn't see it at the time.
moshes: I think this was unnecessary.  hlx: You are correct, this move costs you a point and does not gain you anything. A more proper move would be at A, B, or C as these moves reduce your opponent.
hlx: again, not necessary, loses you a point. If you believe you have played all the possibly moves, pass.
Zander: After this 1-2 sequence, normal play is almost always 3 from Black.
Zander: This move is quite weak for Black. At best Black can hope to claim a bit of territory on the left, but in the meantime White secures the corner and gains influence to the top and center.
Zander: This weak collection of black stones is going to be hard to defend. Sacrificing the stone at B15 would be a smaller loss.
Zander: This practically demands C13 as a response.
Zander: Black already tried this sequence in the upper left corner, and it led to disaster. It would be better to try something else here.
Zander: With the stone at P4 in atari, White was already in better shape, but the last two moves by Black helped White make his group stronger, while bringing the black stones immediately under threat.
Zander: I think it's a mistake for White to make this shape already "peeped" by the stone at D4. I think Black should play at D3; it weakens White's shape, Black gains about the same influence, but with better tempo.
Zander: This move is relatively small at this point. I think a play around H9 is bigger. Or R17 helps secure the top right, which might be enough for Black to win, since White is quite far behind.
Zander: Instead Black can capture to remove the threat (see variation).
Zander: Black is over-reaching. White won't be killed and the black group is weak. Black should pull back to strengthen his group, close White off, and claim the territory at the top.
Zander: Again this is over-reaching by Black. This is not a killing move. Since Black seems to be leading overall at this point, more conservative play is warranted.
Zander: This stone will be difficult to save. Black continues to play unnecessarily aggressively. Black will win the game if he can secure the large territory at the top and settle the groups more-or-less as they are.
Zander: Black can probably read ahead to see that White will win the capturing race after this. Playing at R9 instead results in a smaller loss.
Zander: This shape is very common. F19 is tempting, but it's a mistake.
Zander: In general Black is a bit too aggressive, and a bit too careless with weak stones. The triangle marks indicate places where Black had one stone in atari and neglected to save it. Sometimes the sacrifice is correct, but in most of these cases I think Black would have done better to save the stone, strengthen the local group, prevent an invasion and keep White in a weaker position. The invasion here quickly leads to the end. This is the end of my comments.
...was trying to attack. apparently not a good idea. How should I respond to L3?  I think J3 would be conventional.   K4 definitely looks odd to me.
This is a mistake.  Black doesn't need to escape up, and this isn't making useful influence.  At the same time, the bottom is wide open for white to take.
Good for white.  Black's bottom group is just floating uselessly.
This is a poor choice.   You can't connect underneath, and even if you survive in the corner, white will gain influence toward the middle, which will make things difficult for your floating side stones.  At this point, if this corner is the be the target, D5 or D4 is good.  You want to emerge with a strong wall between the corner and the center.
This doesn't connect to the other black stones, so I think it's a mistake.   B5 or C4 look better to me.
This can't be good - there are too many cutting points for these stones to be considered connected.
Going for outside influence.
this doesn't accomplish anything.  It could have been a Ko threat at some point, but all it does here is change a probably bad black shape into a certainly bad one.
should I close at D6 before kakari? but I know White would make a big extension.  I think this is the wrong side to approach.  It invites a splitting move at d10 which will erase the center influence of black's stones on the bottom.  C4 is a very bad point for black if white gets it.
F5 is already weak, you are extending from a weak point, which makes it weaker. You should attack from a strong point, not a weak one.   D9, for instance,  puts pressure on C9 and threatens to start working with the black groups at the bottom.
Why not C10 here?
If youre going to try to capture the white stones, your only hope is to continue at e13.  But consider that the black side is very weak, not in a good position to attack anyway.
Black really can't do this now.  If white is permitted to capture the black stones in the center, black has nothing left.
My goal was to build a big moyo (and I did).  You've got about half a moyo, but it's still open on2 1/2 sides and is unliley to be preserved.
is Q10 a good point in this situation? or should I do a shimari near Q16?  At this point, I thought I won the game...  You were delusional.   There are at least 5 open areas in addition to the big center, White should be able to make territory in at least 2, and in the process ruin the center.   The only secure area black has is the lower right.  Everything else is open.
still focusing on the moyo.   The center is still open at at least 2 points, and you do not have sente.
m12 would have been better
You should have been able to read this sequence and see that white connects and is oozing into your center.  Since you could see it,  and it is not favorable, you  shouldn't have done it.
I thought I had white for sure...
maybe I should have connected at H12.
this is where everything went wrong
this was a mistake. white K14 and I am dead...
but he didn't see it.
and I had to connect.
safe... for now.
White nicely captured my lower group.
end game now... whihc i am not good at.  I lost the game by about 40-50 points. I only had small areas in the middle.  My question is how can I best utilize the moyo I had in the beginning to win a won game? Clearly my execution was far from satisfactory.  Thank you for your input. You have my appreciations.  You never had a moyo, you had some influence toward the center, but at huge cost.   I think the only way a "big center" strategy can be successful is if your opponent is not paying attention.   It should not be your strategy going in.
Generally, you need to consider that weak points will eventually be attacked, and that widely separated stones are not connected to make a territory, even if there are no white stones in the area.  It's very hard to make territory in the center, and that shoud not be your plan from the beginning.  It can sometimes emerge as a viable strategy, but it's pretty uncommon.
Is this move too slow ? I wanted to put pressure on the white stone.
q1112
For this move, I wanted to make the best kakari with the two stones on the right. Is the move at A also possible ?  V:  This will lead to a flat position.
V:  White's position doesn't have any weaknesses now.
Is the move at A better ?  V:  I think A is better. But it seems a bit slow. Normally when you play the 4-4 you are not in a rush to gain the corner.
I didn't know wich move would be better for me next...  V:  A gives you a low position.  B is big.  You could also try a pincer against the marked stone (which also splits white's position).
V:  This is too greedy.
V:  White's thickness here is superior to Black's position. White has a nice position.  This is a hard game for Black since his position is flat. Try to avoid flat openings, they make the game easier for the opponent.
Is it a correct point to invade ?
V:  With this move, white is planning a splitting attack.  You are very vulnedrable...
Before attacking the white stone, I wanted to put pressure on C4 to gain some influence.  V: Before attacking, you need to make sure your own stones are secure.  White's stones are secure, yours are not. It is White that is attacking.  Putting pressure here only gives white more territory.
V:  You're position is split.  Normally, when you attack a group it's because you are looking to make profit from the attack.  Attacking white here gives you no profit. You cannot kill white with this position. You don't have thickness.  Once white connects his stones, your own stones will come under attack.
V:  This position is incredibly painful for Black. You lost track of your stones.  Look at your global position. You have been cut everywhere.  Your bottom right group has been closed in, it is no longer efficient.  It is important to play globally and think of all your stones in order to prevent this type of position.
V:  Even if you live, white gains an incredibly thick position. At this point, we can say that white has won.  It is because you attacked this group. The attack did not lead to a good result for you.  When you attack, it must be to gain profit. If you can't see where you will gain profit, then attacking is not a good idea.
I thought that a move at A would be too slow. So I played D10.  V:  I think you need to play more defensively. Don't let yourself carry weaknesses in the middle game.  It is crucial to defend all your weaknesses, otherwise all your plans will fall apart.
V:  Even if white did not kill you, he used your weakness to take big side territory.
V:  You are lucky... White needs to play at A.  Even with this kill, you didn't gain enough to win.  The end game is ok, so I will stop the review here.
Mishuu [6k]: yose de folie en perspective Mishuu [6k]: xD
V:  A is sente, B is gote.
Is this around the best move at the moment?  --  No complaints from me.  White is looking somewhat overconcentrated on the left.  Your stones seem more efficient.
I would rejoice at this invasion.  your resulting thickness could really help you dominate the middle game.
Keeping white as small as possible might not be the best way to benefit from the invasion.  To really develop Q10 and Q4, try the variation at P16...
Better to extend as I did, or to go down?  --  Well, the cut at P16 is possible since the ladder is against you and M17 also, but I don't see it as a huge problem.  I might play O10 here instead...
Another extension too far I think.  O10 needs to be taken advantage of.  Even huger than before.
What is the best way to handle this invasion?  --   It looks like white will certainly find a way to live here.  Some bolstering at O10 would have come in handy here.  Difficult to attack this strongly.  The best way to handle this invasion was to play O10 before I think.  An gram of prevention is worth a kilogram of cure.    We can certainly talk about the relative benefits of ways to deal with this, but I think the real mistakes occurred earlier.    Because of the white encroachments at F5, I would probably start at R11, and seek to jump out to F15 after building a bit of thickness.
I dislike this direction because of white F5 group.  F15  is more promising.
Leaves the cut at Q9.  R13 tries too hard to kill.
white is missing out on a great opportunity: Q9.
The humiliating R8 is a direct result of leaving that cut at Q9 in favor of R13.
This is what I meant about choosing the other direction to attack the R10 attachment:   Imagine this position transposed to the top, using this move to play F15 instead.
I wasn't sure how to react to this move.  --  Your options are limited.  Your opponent has more side and corner territory, and you need the center to win.  Your only winning strategy is to kill that stone, but it may not be possible, considering K10's path to connection at the left, the large open territory to make eyes in, and the cutting point at O10.
I would try something similar.
There's a strong compulsion to protect this cut, but you might have to allow the cut, instead ruining his eye shape caused by the 2 space extension.  I would try A:  --  White maybe should have started with H11, G12, something like that.
I feel my moves are a bit vague but and I'm not sure how to control white.  --  He gained a head start when you protected at O10.  But then, N9 was a slow and heavy move by white.  You still have a chance.  I think L12 is too far away.  a or b would be better to ruin eye shape.
Fine.
I prefer L9 to remove eye shape.
A is better to remove eye shape.
No.  white is surrounded on a larger scale - you need to prevent eye shape.  Surrounding closely can actually help your opponent make sabaki.  A good stab at b would have been more effective here, at removing eye shape.  What do you care if white pushes out at N12?  There's nowhere to run to, and he won't connect to his group on the right.
By now you probably wish you had stabbed the eye shape at L9.  His sabaki is coming along beautifully.
He's alive.  Black can resign here.  --  The rest of the game is filling in the borders.  My game summary is at the beginning of this game; I will end my move commentary here.
This seems like it may not have been the biggest point at this time. Where else should I have gone?
Possible to kill white in the top corner?
Necessary? Perhaps not but I wanted to be safe.
Thank you for reviewing my game! I'd like to know what specific areas I need to improve on to get stronger.  Thanks, Jeremy W
cleodboi [8k]: hi gg yamika [8k]: hi
good start for you : you took both sides
your opponent doesn t punish: lucky you ^^
W has a huge lead now
"thank you move"  ( 1 point for free)
cleodboi [8k]: Do You think that this exchange here was unequal? Did this change the outcome greatly?  answer : yes ,  you lose the game here. The goup that you are chasing kills you. Terrible.  plus W has time to take C12 to make your influence worth nothing :-(
cleodboi [8k]: What do you make of this move? cleodboi [8k]: I knew that without an invasion I surely would have lost the game.  Yes : you have to invade, you are really behind, so you are totally right, you have to fight ^_^
cleodboi [8k]: Could I have played the upper left corner better?
you get the corner, he gets the double in the middle
very bad move : he leave you a chance, that was greedy ^^
cleodboi [8k]: I knew my invasion at the top right was good. Could I have reduced anymore?  you could not have done better with all the W stones around. But this was not enough. You where too far behind
cleodboi [8k]: For Move 161 should I have played at S7 or continue at O2?
This move is a bit of an overplay, as black attempts to show.
White has too many cutting points to attempt to kill the black group.  Almost any combination of plays on the marked points will set up a double atari or a ladder from which white can not escape.  (See the variation for one example)
This is the beginning of a mistake by black.  If he had played L15, threatening to capture the 5 white stones, he could have easily escaped.
Black still has a good chance here if he captures rather than playing that atari.  (See variation.)
This is black's very last chance.  He cannot afford this move right now.  He only has 3 liberties, but if he can get one of the white groups down to two liberties, he will be fine.  (See variation.)
After white makes this capture, the game should be his.  The capture itself gives almost 30 points and black's outside influence is weak.  When I saw this, I wondered how this game was going to be close enough to justify a review.
This move is not worth very much.  White and black are both safe in this area and white has poked out into the center.  So, this move doesn't really do anything right now.  The board is still wide open in a lot of places.  The bottom and right sides are big right now and black's bottom right corner could be approached.  Moves at A, B, or C would all be much bigger than playing here.
Approaching the corner, good!
Taking the corner isn't a very good plan here, especially if you're going to let yourself get entirely enclosed as you do.  A better plan would be to jump out with A or B.
This result already looks rather bad for white.  Black has a lot of strong outside influence.  White can tenuki here and should probably do so.  Making the corner bigger only helps black to make the outside stronger.
If white's goal here is to kill the black stones, he cannot succeed.  Black's stones have a little too much strength for that to work.
White is just asking for trouble here.  He is leaving cutting points and giving the black stones excuses to get stronger.
It would be slightly better to make a solid connection here.  (See variation.)
This is another small move.  At this point, black is very much alive in the corner, so white only threatens to take away a couple points with this move.
The ko is pretty big, so it doesn't make a lot of sense to just abandon it right now.
Black doesn't really need this move.  Capturing K12 instead would have been pretty big.  (See variation.)
Pushing through here is a pretty good idea for white.  It works well.
White has played a nice sequence up until this point.  He should be able to contain and kill the large black group.
In a situation like this, playing a solid move at K8 would be slightly better.  Either move kills black, but K8 does it with less weakness, and since white ends up failing to take care of that weakness later, it would have been very useful in this game.
Playing here and giving black an excuse to extend in response is problematic.  Be careful about what strength you give your opponent excuses to build when attacking.
White cannot afford to play this move right now, as black soon shows...
White cannot connect here.  Doing so leaves him with only 2 liberties once black plays K8.  Since there is no way to keep the black stones on the outside at two liberties, it doesn't work.  So, white must play K8 and prepare to fight the ko.  Fighting the ko is painful when the black stones in the middle should have been dead, but it's really the only choice.
Seeing that black could cut because white could connect like this was good.
This move does not accomplish anything.  Notice that if black played it, he would be in atari.  So, white has nothing to worry about until black plays H4.  Playing little unnecessary moves like this really adds up to cost a lot of points over the course of the game.
White does not have time to fill if he wants to win this ko by capturing black.  He should play M13 or M14.  (See variation.)
Rather than pushing here, white would be better off trying to live first.  If he can carve out some big territory on the side, he should still be able to win this game.  Something around Q12 looks like it might work well.
Good job taking advantage of black's mistake here!
This is not a ko threat, so white can ignore it.  (See variation.)
djna: Uncoventional approach to 5-4 stone.  I beleive that this is a bad move, and a bad result ensures. I would either play the conventional A or  consider something around B. A quick search of joseki literature to hand shows now examples of B's move.  The idea of B is that W has played a move that promises thickness in that direction, so play a move that neurtralises that thickness and also woks with the marked B stone
djna: seems like a decent response, an alternative of just playing, a dividing the corner would also be an way of playing
djna: I wonder whether a hane as marked is better, see variation
djna: I view this as not very satisfactory for B, his two stones are looking heavy, short of liberties and wating to be pressed some more. As W I am eyeing A and B. The idea is not that W can kill but by pressing on the outside can build strength.   Meanwhile B really has no great growth potential from this group
djna: I think a good idea as it preempts B playing down here and building someting that makese snese of his group.  I'd prefer to be really aggressing and play  A, I doubt that B can ignore that
djna: a decent development point for B
djna: this is the right direction. But why high? theory here is  4th line does not make a base. Surely you need a base? so play third line
djna tricky to know where to play. This is good becuase both sides want this point. But Black A is a bit lonely. I would prefer to strengthen my weakest stone and attack W a little. How about B?
djna: Very conservative  I think you're just defending, but B didn;t really threaten much with his previous move.   I guess perhaps you're concerned that B next will play here at G17., but if he did surely you're so strong there you can look after your group?  The problem here is that this is a purely defensive move., A, might threaten B and so be a little more active.   I think a move around C is more like it. W needs to sketch out some big territory to match B's top right.
djna: making sense of the shimari and threatening to undercut W's high stone.  Nice idea. Downside is that this is just a bit cramped. reaally B wants to go as far as A, but can't because W is already there  I would prefer B or C because this is an area both sides want.  B is a rally nice point for W because then a B invasion at D still leaves  W with a nice mojo.
djna: this feels like a purely reactive move - what's the long term aim? How much territory can BW hope for here after this? A undercut from the top. There's no opportunity for significant growth, can W expect any more than the 6 marked points?  I would play B. treat C as a light stone, very hard to suppress with one more move by black..
djna: this is a bad move. See Sensei library on the butterfloy formation http://senseis.xmp.net/?KannonBiraki  a). With B&C in place A adds little value because B can invade at the 3-3 and A will end up too close to W's wall.  b). it puts no pressure on B.  Instead either play D to make the corner much stronger, or invade at E  Already, the ,marked  low value moves are making W's territory look a bit small.  An important idea is not just to count what each player has, but also consder how it can grow.  W cannot make top left any more valuable. cannot build a large territory of the right and so has just one growth area  in the bottom left.  B can grow all his three areas, top and bottom right substantially
djna: this is a little slow and over concerntrated , but connects B's two stones together nicely.  If I thought W woulkd answer A, then I would love to play that first.  The problem here is that B has a hard time knowing how to answer the 3-3 invasion
djna: I believe that  W is entitled to this invasion. I just wonder whether W should first do something about the top right.  W has to assume that B will get sente and play something such as A.    If Black gets to play B before W invades then he probably gains 20 points. If Black gets to play A before W invades he probably gets a little less BUT  he threatens to grow further with a move at C.  I think that's why I would play at the top as W. With luck you might even get to to come back to the 3-3 invasion.
djna: why here? A wall facing the marked stones is useless.  Play A. Black is then completely solid. W then either lives, but yields sente and may damage the marked stones or leaves the area and the invasion has failed
Aristos [3k]: at move 29, why not defend as black by just O3 ?  djna: Yes B must connect.. This is an example of a place where reading is absolutely essential.
djna: When I first looked at this I thought: "good that he's prepared to give up stones, it's a common mistake to hang on to stones., but that A stone looke really important. so bad decision"  But the actual result turns out quite well. The big question here concerns W's analysis. What did he actually think about. If ever there is a position where long time limits give time to consider options this is it.  The first thing to consider is what happens if W hangs on to the A stone. I show that variation on the previous move. I'd view that as a "par" result. It's what both sides should have expected  after 1-2.  The second thing is what result W expects after giving up A.   The game continuation seems like a decent result for W, especially if he can get sente.  However B need not give this result. look at the variation from here.  I think the variation shows that  althought this move is a nice idea B has a better answer.  So, the important thing to take from this is the kind of analysis to do. I think reviewing games should not be about finding intricate variations, but about learning what to think about over the board.  Here W must realise that if this move is a mistake (as I beleive) it comes from not analysing both B's possible responses - B and C. The old proverb "there are  two ways to give atari" is a reminder to consider more options.
djna: the situation is now resolved, both sides are live on the outside - so can we play elsewhere?
djna: surely A is better if you are going to play here? But  this is now an argument about a few points. Who ever plays here first  gains about 10 points but loses sente. In other words a move here is worth about 5 points!   There is no strategic significance here. Both sides are solid and stable, play elsewhere.  Further conclusion W probably cannot expect sente from his original 3-3 invasion. Hence The upper side *was* more important.
djna: This should be the losing move!! Well a slight exageration, but B has just given  W sente, and W has given it back!  Worse this does not even work! 1,2.,3 kills .
djna: urgh, no, varaition, but worse, why play here at all? Why argue over 3 unimportant stones?
pmurphy [10k]: you kept sente, good job! solovely [11k]: if i wouldn't i'd be loser here solovely [11k]: let's do it again!   No he didn't. You gave him sente. Why do you care about 3 stones? Devastate the top right.
djna: Build the top or redude the corner? Hard decision. My take is that B can grow faster than W so building the top is better. However if he keeps sent B is surely going to win
djna: wonder if going the other way is better, move for W around A might be fun with a wall facing that way.
djna: just D2 is surely enough?
djna
djna: variation is better
djna: why not A now? surely sente. B's upper left group starts to look very isolated.  I can understand wanting to play here, imagine B playing this point; W's wall would look useless.
djna, tricky to choose between here and H4 or J5. This take territory at the edge but gives the intiative to B. Think I would play H4 and expect either to play  in the top right or  A, B, C squence
djna: it's annoying to have B push us around.
djna: I think a good idea. Big question is how W now keeps that area under control.  I would look for moves in the marked area the plan we want is to isolate the A stone.  we then have  some ideas of pressing against the B group
djna: may be an idea to build strength before invading, but i feel that this is pushing from strength rather than towards it. It encourages B to solidify.  I'm not clear what B would do about a violent move at A, especially of W has played B first
djna: this ought to be a bad move, still leaves C13 as a weakness
djna: need a clear strategic objective. I would want to confine the group and benefit by building my moyo or gaining strength to reduce B. A low move like this should be viewed with suspicion.
djna:  and this why low moves are often bad.   exactly the opposite result from the one W wants. B building on the outside is no good
djna: could B sactrifice this group? two moves elsewhwre on the baord are surely bigger?
djna: Did W see that this was a threat to kill the B group?
djna: the next few moves see B building strength while W tries to hang on to a relatively small area. W must find an alternative.
Aristos [3k]: A4 is a killer move for white
serre [-]: A4 works fine now
djna: compare the result - W has gained no more than B.  All the time the top right is needing attention. and now B has power from his left group
pmurphy:  At this point I was really starting to worry about the upper-right..but what to do?  I think I read somewhere the right place to invade is somewhere around N17 but I wasn't sure where to go with that.   djna: too late! you should not be able to live with N 17 now.   Best you can reasonably hope for are reducing moves around M14. But the danger is that you get chased into B';s left wall.  The tricky thing about this though is that the bottom left B group is unstable, it can live or be killed.  So in fact the game is still just about playable playable for W. But it requries a careful evaluation. We note that Black A is huge, if W kills the bottom left, then B surely gets A  first note that B still has growth opportunities at the top and on the left. W has no real growth chance except he can get 20 points by killing B in the bottom left.  So W needs to find a way to reduce the upper right enough in sente and then play the endgame really well.
djna: this seems very slow
djna: this little sequence has given B lots of points and W none.
djna: W is playing dame, B is taking territory
pmurphy:  ...and this is what I get for waiting   djna: it's worse than waiting.  What response did you expect to 1? Surely 2 is obvious? YOu just asked B to complete his territory.  This is an example where I don't think you can have use your time wisely. You should never play a move if you don't consider your opponents likely responses. What did you think B would do?
djna: big., but killing aji. If you intend to invade, then surely you should not destriy tha aji.
pmurphy [10k]: i gotta try something, i estimate i'm behind by more than 20 of i just let it stand  djna: yes. but really this evaluation and action is 30 moves too late
djna: surely A is better
serre [-]: black needs to learn to attack eye space not stones pmurphy [10k]: i dont think he was taking the invasion seriously.  heh pmurphy [10k]: yeah, definately pmurphy [10k]: once i saw i had the eyeshape on O14 from the right, i figured, hey, why not on the left too? pmurphy [10k]: i was really winging this one  djna: But we all know that this cannot really happen. W got very lucky.
pmurphy [10k]: im pretty sure that's alive! solovely [11k]: you got to be kidding pmurphy [10k]: maybe im just high off tea solovely [11k]: :D pmurphy [10k]: seriously though, I dont see a way to kill that shape pmurphy [10k]: two examples for goproblems.com! solovely [11k]: me too, jesus.. pmurphy [10k]: i guess all those life and death problems ive been doing are starting to pay off.  hehe   Pmurphy:  Was this move unneeded?  I think I could have fended off an invasion by way of N, but after getting all that way I was willing to play gote just to be sure.  djna: see variation.
djna: lots of little reading after this. Here for example sruely W should play A, must be sente or B suffers reduction at B.  Both sides seem to miss how big C is.
solovely [11k]: damn i was so cautious about my fortress:(
pmurphy [10k]: hehe..it sure was formidable..that was really a desperation move on my part pmurphy [10k]: didnt expect it to work! solovely [11k]: i hate playing against that kind of moves, i'm very often confused by them, like today:)
djna: why give up ko threats? play this much later.  Also to miss the importance of the marked connection is very bad, but surprisingly easy to do (I know I was that solder) as a general rule, double check things as the liberties go down.
pmurphy:  I feel like this was the best reduction I could have made, but maybe something on the first line was possible?   djna: no this is good. Leaves good follow up. A is bigger.  That's my last comment.
pmurphy [10k]: there's no way to plan for a desperate assault by an opponant who has nothing to lose!
serre [-]: Q12 was nice
pmurphy [10k]: thanks, i was saving that trying to catch everything from P11 to K8 but i didnt have the tempo
serre [-]: that really should have been played at A4
pmurphy:  I can't beleive I overlooked A4 for pretty much the whole game.
pmurphy [10k]: good save, i was totally fixing to wreck that group
solovely [11k]: youre not the one that likes goproblems.com:) pmurphy [10k]: hehe..such a sweet site solovely [11k]: only one:)
pmurphy [10k]: see..what i was afraid of was this: pmurphy [10k]: but i forgot i could do t his:
pmurphy [10k]: i think F 6 would have killed me there solovely [11k]: no, h8 breath gives you life, or c5 connection, hard to kill pmurphy [10k]: oh yeah, because i could connect at E6 and increase my liberties..i was thinking if I went G4 instead you'd be able to link up to your E5 stone and catch me in shortage of liberties
serre [-]: or play the ko for a bit
serre [-]: B5 is short on libirties
pmurphy [10k]: in retrospect i think going R1 isntead of K1 would have given me an extra point
pmurphy [10k]: which is a point for  black pmurphy [10k]: i dunno, looks like there's another point there to me.. pmurphy [10k]: anyway, i have to get going.  thanks again!
solovely [11k]: 1 point:) pmurphy [10k]: hehe..every point counts! pmurphy [10k]: i just didnt have a reason to fill it in unless you went A2 first solovely [11k]: yep
solovely [11k]: ok, that was a joke:)
uter [4k?]: hi uter [4k?]: have fun liberaji [3k]: hello
OM: what joseki choice is appropriate here?  I would say it's either A or B.  White C or D is not favourable.
Here, black should play R2.
OM: this is a surprise: I later read in Kogo's that it's a trick move.  Yes, pls look at the variation for the proper moves.
OM: Right direction? I tried this side, but B later penetrated it.  Guess not, you should consider pincer around A and make jumps into the center.  Pls note that the corner is alive, so O3 is not threatening and not worth a move which is say about 15-20 points.
OM: should I have played this or maybe "pushing plan"? (see var)  This is good move and glad that you played it.
OM: I felt ok at this point, since B's positions are still invadable  Yes, you are correct, A is a good place to invade.  Perhaps before D15, black should play B to E to protect A in sente...
OM: which joseki here?  Keima at A is OK, pls look at the variation.
Pls look at the variation.
Black should not tenuki and you can  play A here.  P7 should play at B instead, black has to extend or else white play A.
I think white A better.  Black can play A, with B as next move if white choose to cap at C, not quite killable group.
Here, A is a must, it is a very crucial shape move.
OM: I hoped to press the corner group a little bit but B sealed the invasion in. Any better plan for W?  Jump out at A, not much of a choice here.
Now it is like black played P13 and M9..  You invade at Q12, black tenuki and still your turn...  Something doesn't seem right?
Pointless to play such moves, chances of success  is way too low..  You should cut loss, play A to reduce, black B and you play C to expand the moyo on top.
Black should play A, then you suffer even more...
OM: Actually I was somewhat relieved to find life here  The fact is, even if you are alive, this is a bad result for white, you created a losing situation.  Black got a very nice wall outside as compensation.
Here, white A is possible, give up 4 or 5 stones and solidify the left side.
Black should play A.
OM: I gave up a lot here  On the contrary, I would Black didn't get much here (only about 10 pts).
One thing to clarify, because white can't get a favourable position if he choose to block at A...  So to avoid all this, playing E8 at the very first chance is a must.
Black should play A.  E9 become a junk stone, which is sad for white.
White A (F8) too big.
This is an endgame move...  Even if black play B18, white can tenuki.
OM: another surprise. Does it mean B18 was wrong? How does W answer this?
Well, there isn't a cut here, because black can easily make 2 eyes.  Pls see the variation.
In actual fact, this is bad for black.   Playing dame at N14 instead of trying to make 2 eyes...  And K16 look isolated.  Black should play A.
White missed a chance here.  Pls look at the variation.
Rather greedy move.
OM: this is a nifty sequence by B  Yes, good chance to resign for white here.
I guess I should end the review here.  Even if you get this good point (F8, actually better if played early), the boundares are more or less fixed, you can't probably get good chances to reverse the game.  I hope you enjoy this review.  Best regards, Jimmy Koh
OM: can W win in the corner if he plays N11?
OM: Now W is too far behind
Dudzik: Hi, I'm Dudzik[1d] and I'll be your reviewer for today!  Disclaimer: I have no idea what I am talking about.  But if you listen to me you may get stronger.  In short, you missed some important global vital points and let your opponent's moyo get out of control.  You also played some premature endgame moves, falling behind a bit more, and when you finally invaded, it was too late and you did not play flexibly enough.  You should have gotten killed, but even living was not enough by then.  That is not to say that the game was a complete disaster, but you were behind for most of the game, and missed a few key chances to turn the game around.
Dudzik: If you want to avoid this modern Korean stuff, you can always hane at A before this invasion.  I think it's a little simpler.
Dudzik: I don't really know this joseki, but it seems like you're hurting the O3 stone here. (L3 would have been a perfect extension later)
RS: I messed up on this joseki, now the result looks worse than with the standard 3-3 invasion.  Dudzik: Yes, this doesn't seem great for white.  Q2 was a mistake.  S6 seems slow for white, but it's painful (and sente!) for black to play there.
Dudzik: You could consider playing at A to take a little air out of black's moyo. (of course, it's more dangerous)
RS: I thought about kicking with E17, but I don't want to strengthen the black stone on "my" side. Also I'd like to play solid because of the large knights shimari.  Dudzik: I like this move locally, but I would probably consider doing something about black's moyo--A, B, or C, for instance.
RS: This seems one point too far, but I see no straightforward way of exploiting this right now, so I just approach from the outside, making black defend.  Dudzik: It's not necessarily a bad move.  The two space extension is a little heavy for black here. (see the variation)
Dudzik: I think this move is too early.  I know that you're thinking about attacking these stones, but look at black's moyo.  It seems very important to get a move around A.  It's also the most empty area of the board (7 lines of territory, compared with 5 on the top)  B might be even more important, though.
RS: Just play solid, again taking a large corner. This move also threatens the R14 stone, and black is still owing a move at the top.  Dudzik: This is too slow now.  Time to do something about black's moyo.  I would consider A, B, C, or D before this move. (the idea of D is to run into black's moyo while attacking)
Dudzik: You are helping black to build his moyo.  If you want to play near here, you should play, for example, A, B, or C, so that black can't easily close everything.
Dudzik: I would be pretty happy with this game if I were black.
RS: This was originally planned as a leaning attack, to build strength for a top invasion. But if black had just defended the top instead of this move, I would have accomplished nothing.  Dudzik: Leaning attacks only work when you have a severe follow-up.  And leaning against a moyo is usually a bad idea--then it becomes territory, and you have to kill big to make up for it.  Also, even if you swallow black on the top, you are still behind.
Dudzik:  A is a very important move.  But it may already be necessary to go deeper--B or C, for example. (it's dangerous, but black is so big otherwise!)
Dudzik: This is a very bad move for black.  He can't save both groups and he's making you stronger.
Dudzik: This is almost endgame.  If he moves into the corner, he can get at most one eye in gote.  But it's not as bad...
Dudzik: ...as this move.  He can't get *any* eyes in the corner now if you tenuki.  Actually, if you think of this as fixing white's shape, it is not so bad, but a move at A could be faster.  In any case, you should be eagerly awaiting the chance to cut at B. (locally, that is--globally you should still be keeping your eye on the moyo)
Dudzik: Unlike the left side, where there were eyeshape issues, this move is 100% bone fide endgame.  It's not as big as it looks.  Compare this to a move at A.  What's more, the triangled point should be double sente in the endgame.  If you let him play it now, you lose your chance to play it later.  So S15 is basically a trick move at this stage... don't respond!
Dudzik: Tiny.  Very tiny.
Super-duper tiny.
Dudzik: Probably the best choice, but you're way behind now.
Dudzik: Black fixes his cutting point at F16 in sente.
RS: Now I have a problem. Black has a HUGE moyo.  A quick count (I actually did count at this point in the game, and came to the same conclusion as in the review): White has about 75 points solid territory, with not much potential to gain more. Black has about 80 points if I count the bottom and right moyo up to the 4th line. This means I have to destroy all of the center to win.  Dudzik: It looks to me that you need to try a deep invasion of the bottom.  Let's review what went wrong:  1: Damaged the O3 stone so that white ended up painfully sealed in in the lower right.  2: Let black jump to build the right side.  3: Forced black to build the right side further.  4: The final critical mistake--should have invaded the lower left.
RS: I chose this spot for the invasion because there is already a stone there as support.  Dudzik: It's not bad.  But it's going to be hard.
Dudzik: These stones are not important.  Saving them is a very bad idea.  Starting at A to try to save the bottom side (while breaking into the center) seems like the only hope here.
Dudzik: This move really helps black.  Again, the triangled stones are not important.
RS: Pfew. One group safe. As I see it, I still have to make life with either L6 or M3, or at least use their aji for another invasion.  Dudzik: Your L3 stones were more important to save, and they're doomed now.  Incidentally, I think that A is better shape here.
Dudzik: It's bad shape.  You have a better move--A.
Dudzik: Still should be A.  Now he's going to cut you!
PS: Neccessary, but probably at the wrong spot (see var).  Dudzik: Black could have cut on the previous move, so you got lucky here.  I agree that this move is bad for endgame compared with C5.
RS: Now let's pull out this group. If this lives, the game should be close ;)  Dudzik: Impossible.  You stamped out all the possibilities here while saving your triangled stones.
RS: I think this was a mistake. After the game I talked about this situation with my opponent and he said he was afraid of the top left group dying, but I don't think there is any danger...  Dudzik: I don't think it matters.
Dudzik: Black should destroy white's shape, but I think white is still dead this way.
Dudzik: Black should extend here, this hane gives you forcing moves.
Dudzik: Black is getting impatient.
Dudzik: Black should have played O7.  Black almost lost the game with this move.
RS: Alive ;)  Now I really archieved my goal of destroying the whole center, so the game should be close again. I probably should have verified this in the game by counting, then I would have payed more attention to endgame :P  Dudzik: Let's see how the endgame went...
Dudzik: A seems to be much better endgame--see the variation. (this is very important--I didn't find any other serious mistakes in the endgame)
Dudzik: Can black escape here?  I don't think so.  Play A or B instead.
flOvermind: Now studying tesuji finally pays off ;)  Dudzik: Big endgame. :)
flOvermind: Now there are just endgame moves left...  Dudzik: It's been the endgame for the past twenty moves.  The move you just played, for example, was 8 points gote.
Dudzik: You lost one point with this move. (Should be J13)  This was the losing move.
RS: Game losing mistake :P  Seriously: Even though I could have won this game by paying more attention in the endgame, I still feel there were a lot of huge mistakes before, and this close result is not really deserved.  Dudzik: Actually, the game was miscounted.  You would have lost even if you played C5 here.
Dudzik: Game's not quite over yet--see the variation. :)
When i have a stone on the rightside i preffer to play s2 instead of p2.. Is that oke?  QuickMan:I believe that both is playable, as the triangled stone is far enough
QuickMan:We both know this is a very good eschange for black, but you must realize few things.  1) Some players make some obvious mistake in the beginning on purpose to make their opponent understimate them (Bad manner technique but often succesful)  2) Becouse you could overestimate the value of this, let's try to (very approximately) calculate how many points is it worth of.  a) the aji at A/B is gone + the territory is more secure (10 poitns)  b) the invasion at C later on will be harder to make for black (-5 points)  So let's assume the mistake is (very very approximately) worth of 5 points.   3) Your opponent has the same rank as you have, so he is probably better at the later stage of the game.  ==> Don't underestimate him
QuickMan:Another mistake of your opponent, after the exchange,  he should have expand at least one point further!!
QuickMan: This move of your opponent is too submisive.
I felt white was not really alive yet with the s2 stone in place.. so i thought atack while he is still weak... maybe to early??  QuickMan: I think this move is good, but don't think he will be demolished if he tenukis, as he made this overconcentrated shape, it is quite robust
tenuki.. then i must invade i tought.
QuickMan: This move is questionable, and maybe too straightworward, I believe some strong players would play it, but I wouldn't.  A or B would force him to live, which is humiliationg enough as punishment for tenuki.
i played s6, white cannot cut at s9 and i can always connect with the bottom group t3.  QuickMan:The triangled spot is much better move!  a) better shape b) much less aji around A  This is the first serious mistake.
Here is a i don't know ..  i did not want white to connect, so i felt q10 would split and put pressure on white.  QuickMan:You can immedeatly see that the stone at A would be very helpful, this was the aji I was talking about :)  With stone at A, B would been possible
afterwords i felt this could've been played better for black. Idea's?
White is happy with this result, he has sente and safe group.
QuickMan:This is white's overplay for sure as the triangled spot is urgent for both.
white still not alive.. but he is building bigtime at the top... atack?  QuickMan:Correct.
desperate attempt to reduce leftside... i feel here is were i need some advice....  QuickMan:I also don't think that attacking the white group directly won't get you something.  So the question is: How to reduce white, while slowly closing the way for the white group  or To close the way for the white group IN A WAY the forcing move on the white group will get you something.  I don't say I know the anwer, heh, I just wanted you to try to think about this more often in your games :)  This move seems to be ok.
QuickMan: Oh, this is very impatient move.  Move around A,B seems to be much better, because.  a)It slowly closes the way for the triangled move. b) It attacks the lonely white stone c) It makes the square moves stronger (extend the weak group prowerb.  while your mova aims just for single thing - reduce territory  3 reasons against 1 seems to be very simple but effective argumentation :)  This is the 3rd most serious mistake.
QuickMan: It is inconsistent to first eschange A for B, to make white stronger there, and then extend at C.
You still need very badly play on the right:  Proverb:"Extend the weaker group"  Quite safe A, or very aggresive B would serve your purpouse better.
QuickMan: Good move, split white, and kill at least one part, I would play more directly A
QuickMan:This is painful, white is gettring too many moves in the center, and your attack is going to be wasted.
i felt i was doing oke... whit the two groups spit and neither alive...
after words.. i felt this variation could be better see variation
painfullty played in the wrong direction.. :( my own group wasn't alive
QuickMan: A is better (aji and fight feeling) You will loose sente anyway, so why don't make straight strong shape instead?
now i felt the game was really hard for me..
QuickMan:Good
QuickMan: this move is bad, it let's white to get nice shape.
QuickMan: I will finish the comment here, as it looks like it will be only endgame now.
EmTom: Terrible move... A is much better.
I just looked at senseis, apparently this isn't joseki. I need to do my homework...  EmTom: Correct.
EmTom: I think you jumped too far here. It is quite difficult to deal with white attack at A. I would play a little more solid move and then look for oportunities on the right side (probably later in the game) as whites marked stone is obviously quite weak. It is very likely that any fight at the top will strenghten this stone.
correct?  EmTom: It seems so... This fight is very complicated though.
EmTom: White suffers from his earlier mistake...
EmTom: This seems odd... I would just jump out.
EmTom: This is not a good move. White can cut as in the game in sente. Changing move order shows why this is bad (see wariation).
EmTom: So the fight ends for now. I think the result is better for black. He got a big corner and white got some influence but aji at A is a little troublesome.
EmTom: So... white wants to give you some more stones... This just cant work...
happy with this move... ;-)
EmTom: I dont like this push... White gets too strong and black seems heavy. See variation.
Usually I don't attack like this. Perhaps J3 would have been better...
EmTom: A mistake. Marked stone forces you to extend solidly.
I think white made a mistake here, no?  EmTom: It is unusual yes...
i liked this move too
EmTom: White is very greedy. Its usually bad to abandon weak group like this.
EmTom: Ouch... Contact play is forbidden when you want to attack ;) Well sometimes it is good but generally not.
I rarely manage to kill groups in situations like this, but it would be nice to get a load of outside influence in the process... slowly I'm swallowing L4  EmTom: See? You should be ahead of white when you attack... you played contact moves and now white is outside. Anyway... try to kill only when you are sure you can. Otherwise just attack to gain something elsewhere.
EmTom: What a terrible move...
EmTom now its gote.
that worked out nicely too
So I thought things were going well here, but looking at it again, white's center is pretty big...
unnecessary?  EmTom: You probably dont want white to cut here so its a good solid move. You are ahead so playing this way is ok.
EmTom: I wonder if this is sente... It seems white cant do anything at the bottom. So you probably should ignore this move...
EmTom: This move doesnt do that much... Did you ask yourself what is its purpose? Did you count teritory? Did you think about what you need to do to win this game? These are important questions. Especially the last one. If you know how much ahead you are, you can decide how many points you can give to your opponent.   If you thought about this at this moment in the game you would probably notice that: - you are ahead. My estimation is about 65 pts for black, about 30 for white without the center. That means you can allow white to get 30(!!!) points in the center. Is it even possible to get 30 points there? It seems this should have been a comfortable win for you.  - If you know that you are ahead by about 30 pts, you know that all you need to do is to calmly play endgame. So maybe you start with A, maybe B, C... anything.   Anyway your move is not worth that much so you begin to lose the game right here.
EmTom: You push white forcing him to close his moyo... What for?
foolish?  EmTom: Yes... You should already know why :)
mistake, I started to feel that I had to get away with something I shouldn't be able to get away with. Of course that doesn't work often when white is stronger...  EmTom: Just count points. If you are behind you do have to come up with something more than you can. When you are ahead however you should play calm reducing moves. Just simple yose moves. It is your opponent who needs to complicate game.
EmTom: It seems you started to panic... Changing plans every other move... If you started the invasion you HAVE TO do something with it. You allowed white 30 points there so game becomes very close.
EmTom: This sequence of moves kills aji of A. Its better to cut at A first.
sometimes I don't play out the sequence to the end like I should. Greedy about keeping sente...
EmTom: This move is 0 points.
overplay  EmTom: Yes.
nice by white  EmTom: White now leads a lot.
worth a try...
EmTom: This was big and sente for white. But its too late for you now.
a poor move by Black, starting to feel nervous...
EmTom: ???
this worked out better than I thought
EmTom: 20 points... in yose... Cant believe my eyes :)
gote for white, while there are still sente moves on the board...  EmTom: The game is already over...
H: The Chinese opening is my favorite opening, I play it whenever I can.  I'm used to A and B as the common responses to this opening.
H: This isn't a move I see often, so I wasn't sure what to do.  I think that my response was a good one.
C: Yep.
C: This must be too early.  This is good for you.
C: I think this move is the wrong direction.  If I were white I would respond at A right away.  A is an OK move for black here, but I would consider, for example, B or C. (or D?)
H: I am not sure what the proper move in response to this is.  It seems a bit odd, not taking the hane here.  C: Just play A and be happy for the extra points.  B is good too.  You played too dangerously.
C: I've heard Yilun Yang 7p say that you need 4 liberties to jump.  Or is it 5?  Anyway, after white pushes at A you have only 3.
C: This is a thank-you move--white should probably cut right away--see the variation.
H: I was pretty sure that taking sente to create a large moyo would be a better choice than securing c2 immediately since the e3 cut isn't dangerous.  C: I agree.  But beware of trying to make territory with thickness.
C: Why not connect at A?  It's nice and big, and protects the cut.
C: Move 45 is too early to play endgame moves.
C: Don't attach to weak stones.  Play A or B and get ready to attack this stone on a big scale.  (you gave up the upper right corner for thickness, so you have to make sure you use it by attacking.)
H: This seems poorly placed.  I expected q4.  C: This is bad, but Q4 would be just terrible.  A is the move I would choose for white here.
C: White can easily destroy your potential territory with a move like A, so this move seems a little empty.  I would think about playing B.  If white responds at C, D becomes a great attack.  Letting white connect to the triangled stone can't be very good for you.
C: Did you consider A instead?  Remember, the goal is to keep white separated.
C: Dangerous.  The 1-2-3 sequence is very worrying when white gets enough liberties.  White could even play it immediately and you would at the very least have a very difficult reading problem on your hands.
C: Maybe a mistake by white.  A instead would greatly complicate the situation for you.  As it is, you have already fixed the cut at B.
C: This move is the wrong thinking.  These two stones are completely worthless.  You need to move your stones out and attack the whole white group.
C: White is happy.
C: White's getting a little overexcited here.
C: Too close--white can run out easily.  A looks like a good move here, since you can play B in sente.
C: Why?  A is probably the biggest move.  The fight in the center is lost.
C: Good.
C: I'm not going to comment too much on this fight, but I have some comments later.  White missed several chances to win the game easily.
C: Call me crazy, but it looks like you could have played A here.
C: I don't see the value of this move.
C: Bad move by white--J17 is enormous.
H: I didn't realize that I needed to respond to this move, and lost a lot of points for the mistake...  C: You don't.  But you made a mistake when white played A2.
C: Absolutely needs to be at A instead.
C: Not a ko threat.  There is a double ko and you cannot save the B9 stones.
C: Of course this is not a ko threat.  A and B are good, though.
C: White could have won the game by playing at A.
C: What are you afraid of? :)
reid: Hello Thomas,  Let's start right here.  R6 is an interesting idea.  Usual of course is to attach at either A or B.  White ends up with a strong wall, but that's the price black pays for getting three corners.  With R6, black is saying he wants to let white take more profit in the upper right corner in exchange for black building a framework on the bottom edge.
reid: In go, as in most aspects of life, it's important to pick which battles you want to fight.  How should you pick them?  It's not too hard:  you want to fight where you already have an advantage.  Early on, that means you want to fight where you have a simple numeric superiority of stones.  Kind of like entering a boxing ring - you would prefer to have a weight and height advantage over your opponent, right?  In the upper right, it's three white stones to 1 black.  After black plays, it's three white vs two black.  On average, white has a two-to one advantage, or a one ahd a half stone advantage.  Black cannot hope to get a 'good' result here against those kinds of odds.  And he doesn't really need to play here yet.  Better I think would be to play somewhere else where the fight is more in black's favor.  If white takes one more move to secure the upper right corner, then he deserves to have it: he's played three extra stones there.  So black can wait to see how things develop.  Playing P18 now is not very consistent with R6 - black seems to want everything.  I think black A instead of P18 would be a fast and interesting way to proceed.  Ming-Jiu: P18 is OK.
reid: After this sequence, black has a problem at A which destroys black's eyespace.  White may not be able to take advantage of it right away, but black must be very careful how the rest of the game develops so that A doesn't become a lethal weakness.  That also means white should be able to count on getting a lot of the territory to the left of K17 and K15 (black can't afford to invade there because of his weakness at A).  Ming Jiu: Insteaad of M15, black should push into the corner with B.  If white resonds solidly with C, black also makes a solid shape with D.  If instead white hanes at E, then black takes a liberty with F to take advantage of the aji.
reid: I would be reluctant to help white this way.  White should be able to harden his territory now.  If black doesn't play C14, then later he might be able to play directly at C17 or D17 to reduce the white structure.
reid:  Hmmm, I think it's more natural for white to pincer at A.  If black dives into the corner with B, then white encloses and makes K15 shine.  If black jumps out to C, then again K15 should work well.  Finally, if black makes a double approach at D, white ducks in to B and fights, and once again K15 will be very useful.  You must spend every effort to make the stones you already have down on the board work as hard as possible.  Ming Jiu: C14 is OK.  If white A, then black B and white E.  The joseki continues with black F through white K.  Now black has three corners, so he can be satisfied with this result.  Nowever, white F16 is too slow.  Instead, white should keep the corner with L (B15).
reid: Black gets a fast development.  White is all concentrated on the upper edge.
reid: I think if I were white, I'd want to play at A instead.  This can extend either way for easy life.  Once white has a foothold here, he can look forward to pressing on the black shimari in the lower right.  His goal would be twofold: first of course, reduce black's territory.  But more insidiously, white is looking to exploit black's weakness at B.  Some thickness around C would be just the thing.
reid: Black gets a bit more territory this way, but he helps white a lot.  Black often plays at A instead so white doesn't get quite so much help.  But keeping the corner here is not very consistent with D10.  Black gets the corner, but he gives up white influence that reduces the area around C8.  On the other hand, there doesn't seem to be any good move around D6 either.  This seems to lead to the conclusion that a pincer (B perhaps?) might be a better way to go.
reid: Black is jumping the gun here.  The joseki move is black E5.  Ming Jiu: Yes, E5 is joseki, but black can also take white's extension.  But not with K3 - black should play high with A (K4) instead.  The  response to K3 at B(K5) is too easy for white.
reid: After white turns here, black has an awkward problem.  The magic move (and a good trick to remember) is white A.  It turns out to be surprisingly difficult to handle this move.  Black's aji is terrible.
Isn't A better ?  reid: If white A, then black B pretty much locks up the left side (perhaps in sente, too).  I think white should probe at C right away and see how black answers.  Ming Jiu: When white wants to play in the corner, the move is at D, not C.  If black blocks at E, he can't stop black pushing down and cutting through black I.  So white will be able to connect with E.
reid: This looks overly aggresive for black.  The proverb says 'play away from strength'.  This looks too close to the very strong F4 wall.  Calmer would be to simply take a large territory with A, looking to attack this whole group later.  Ming Jiu: after black A, the timing is right for white to probe with B
reid: but perhaps this isn't white's best choice for handling J5 (although it certainly feels natural).  Hane on the outside (A) seems to work better,  If then black J4, white just connects over with B and black doesn't accomplish much.  Cutting at C is difficult for black: white D threatens a ladder and also white E.  And again, that outside thickness is what white needs to exploit black's weakness at F.  Ming Jiu: Yes, white A is better.
reid: this doesn't turn out very well for white.
Ming Jiu: This result is very good for black.  Ming Jiu's comments end here.
Here i was feeling very good  reid: Yes, white seems to have two weak groups.  Not a good strategic position.
reid: OK, around here the play by both sides seems to get a bit erratic.  White M5 is very busy - perhaps overly optimistic.  White G6 seems to be aji-keshi...
reid: if black wants to attack the white stones, a simple bamboo joint is better.  When you touch your opponent's stones, you help them get stronger.  Here, black wants the white K6 stones to stay weak so they're easier to capture.
reid: This looks like more aji-keshi.
reid: Now we can do a small tewari analysis: if black had played the bamboo joint instead of K7, and then white peeps at F8, does black want to respond with K7?  Probably not.
reid: this looks lik an overplay given the weakness of the white F5 stones.  Safer to just jump to A.
First i thought it was a good move but it seems to give white a better eye shape. So is it a good or bad move ?  reid: Do you mean black E9 or white E8?  White E8 seems like the only response to black E9.  But E9 seems odd.  I'm not sure what black is trying to accomplish.  Enclose white?  More natural would be to cut off the overplay with black D8,  but black is hampered by his C3 weakness.  It's a complicated situation - difficult to analyze.  That's why the joseki move is E5 instead of K3.
reid: This is a classic empty triangle - very bad shape for black.  If black is trying to keep the area around C12, perhaps A is better than D9.  Then black has the possibility of a ko cut (after black A, black B, white C, black cut with ko at D).  I am going to end the analysis here.  We've covered a lot of ground.  I'd say the deciding factor in this game was white not recognizing black's weaknesses (overplays): first at N18, and later at C3.  White lost the intiative and his F5 stones became a target for attack.  White needed a larger-scale view of the game to take advantage of black's overplays (P18 / M17, and N3).  Black needs to be a bit more patient, and more willing to share the board.  You can't get everything in this game, and in fact you don't want everything.  You just want one point over break-even.  A solid one point lead is far better than a tenuous 50 point lead.  Take the time to make your josekis complete and your positions solid.  You want to be exploiting your opponents' weaknesses, you don't want them exploiting yours.  Good luck, play strong - reid
i misread, i thought it was a killing move...
Now the white weak group is secured and mine is weaker than ever. Where I did wrong ?
Now i think i'm definitively ahead.
I won on time here  Buster [1d]: thx
C: Your first move seems a bit off balance. Usually, in handicap games, it's better to play safe because you start off with an advantage before you even do anything. Especially because white played on hoshi and not komoku, it's much better here to just take the fourth corner rather than kakari.
C: Again, much better to take the fourth corner with this move. D10 is slow; you already invested a move on the left side and C14 is not in immediate danger. See variation, white cannot take serious advantage of a black tennuki.
C: White is satisfied with a second corner
C: First of all, the kakari is better from the other side. Since you already have a position on the left side, setting up on the bottom would result in the favorable "double wing" shape. Also, this move is very light. Not bad, but the normal keima kakari is much more natural and more often played. Don't forget you start with the advantage in handicap games. Playing safe is the best way to minimize the difference in skill level between two players, if you start going into positions you aren't familiar with, it gives the more experienced player opportunities.
C: I don't think this move is joseki.
C: R10 gives a better shape here.
C: This move is a mistake by white. It is important to secure the bottom right with an addition move at O3. If white really wants to approach the top right, O16 is better, as F17 is already low.
C: Too passive! White's position in the bottom right is not secure yet, and Q11 already supports the hoshi stone.
C: Very bad for white, this play must be high at K16 or L16.
C: Again, this move is a bit too passive. The biggest move is still on the bottom right. If you want to reduce the top, the proper move is at K16, taking advantage of white's mistake in making the very low position.
C: White takes the largest play on the board.
C: The shape is more solid at D6, but either way, tennuki is better. The continuation is tricky, but the flower ko is here.
C: A poor move from white. B16 is the vital move for the corner. The left side is too big for such a slow reduction and the top is unfavorable because of the black stone at O15.
C: Better to start with the sente move at B16.
C: White is not strong on the bottom, it is possible to invade deeper.
C: This move is very strange. P4 is more natural here, as it is sente.
C: This shape is almost always bad. It seems you are trying too hard to kill the Q9 stone. Remember, attaching to weak stones makes them stronger.
C: Connecting directly is usually better. White has good aji with the peeps.
C: White wastes a move here, it is not possible to kill the O3 group anyway. Defending at K5 is very important right now.
C: Very bad! The white group is extremely weak, attaching to K3 removes all possibility of attacking it.
C: This move is unnecessary, white does not have to sorry about the cut. In addition, white can stabilize the bottom group in sente by playing at D2 instead.
C: The difference on the board after L3 is huge. Note that white used L3 to stabilize the bottom group and has now saved his O8 group using the extra stones from the L3 sequence.
C: This move serves no purpose. White's center group is strong and can no longer be attacked. There are several major sente moves on the board remaining, the largest being at B16. Some other moves to consider for later are E2 and P18, the second of which is a major sente endgame move.
C: Notice the exchange of black L15 for white K16 improves white's shape.
C: This move is very small. Your group is in no danger, so it is not necessary to defend it. Again, the largest move right now is at B16.
C: This exchange also improves white's shape.
C: The keima can be easily cut because of white's stone on K16. I found an interesting tesuji here that can cut off white's stone at F12 beginning with J13 here in place of J14.
C: Good! This is the largest place on the board.
C: The solid connection is not necessary, your group is already safe. The biggest endgame move now is at P18.
C: It's more solid to just connect at N6.
C: Any play in the center now is small. Remember that in the endgame, moves in the center usually don't make much impact if they don't concern the life of a group. Once things start to settle, you should be looking for sente moves on the side. Although initially, these moves look small, they cause solid swings of 5-10 points, and judging by the outcome of this game, these are enough to turn things around. P18 is the move here. This move alone swings the game by 2-3 points, but the key here is that it is also sente, as white is forced to respond at O18, meaning you gain 2-3 points and lose nothing. People who are good at endgame are the people that can find these sente strings, taking solid points without losing momentum.
C: This move is dangerous. Black still needs to watch out for the potential cutting points at F6 and E4.
C: You are forced to protect the cut and lose some points here.
C: Black loses around 30 points from this sequence.
C: White takes the big point.
C: The response is strange, blocking at Q18 is fine.
C: Unnecessary, this move is aji keshi.
C: It seems that white missed this tesuji.
C: A big mistake by white, giving up sente. T10 is the only way to continue.
C: Notice that playing R18 instead of Q18 before put you back a move, and lowered your score by one point, as you essentially filled up one space of your own territory.
C: It is more solid to connect directly at B12.
C: Not necessary, white's group is already alive.
C: Not necessary. Remember that filling in your own territory like this subtracts one from your score at the end, something that usually doesn't make a difference at the kyu level, but play like every point counts, as in a close game like this, it does.
C: White also fills in his own territory.
R: when black played sanrensei, the usual follow ups are as marked to play a moyo oriented game.   Black's move is strange - not that it's a bad move but asking for a fight this early in the game leads to a lot of unpredictabilities.
R: strictly speaking, this position isn't really good for white as P3 is already low.   Maybe you could try hane on the outside next time. Sure the crosscut by black or double hane can lead to a complicated fight but it could be interesting :)
R: this move is questionable as it invites black to play some good moves afterwards.
R: so now black's group is more or less settled while white's C14 leaves a lot for black to attack.
R: this is not a good move at all if you just want to move out. It strengthen black for nothing in return.
R: this is also not a good move - remember to avoid pushing from behind.
R: there's no point in this exchange really - black's thankful for this kind of move.
R: this is a waste of move. You still leave behind a lot of aji in the corner. And this is just too slow at this stage. How about playing directly at Q11 or R11?   Any cut at P4 or around that area is fine as you can sacrifice a few points in the corner to build a solid wall on the outside to work with the Q11 R11 stones.   If black jumps in you can use the wall for your attack while the approach at R14 isn't bad at all - it works well with Q11 or R11 stones.  Q11 is the move I'd play but R11 if you want to play more solidly.
R: this is contradicting with the idea behind sansenrei. Should be played at Q10 instead
R: but W's reply is just as reserved - you have a strong wall there, R9 should be fine
R: I can't agree on this one as  1) it helps black - the wall is fine and works well with the framework.  2) black's push at R10 is sente. and White doesn't really benefit from this.   E14 still has its value as a miai move
R: good thing black is fickle - he changes his direction too much.  any move around the marked areas are fine for black as the 2 black stones at N8 are light. Plus they can always escape to L8, L7.
R: black should have read ahead a bit more and treat this stone as light. P12  is good.
R: switching direction here isn't good. Even though black group's demise is certain, he can still get something out of the corner to somewhat compensate for the loss.
R: this is too small   any of the marked points are bigger
R: luckily, black played a pretty useless move as well.
R: again, there are much bigger points on the board for white to grab. If you have enough time, it's probably better spent in this stage of the game as each big move you make will definitely benefit the latter half of the middle game and even end game.
R: probably at this stage - w's wall at this location isn't really going to yield much points, black should have played at B3 instead.
R: P12 is just too slow and too laxed.
this one was bad for me i think
R: true that it's a bad move
R: But the follow up isn't any better  you're facing a black wall - there are so many points to invade  as white is strong in the centre, it's ok even if black gets a wall facing the centre now so the time to invade the top is now.  any of the marked points would have been good enough
R: even at this point it's not too late to invade the top
R: this is bad
R: black doesn't need this move   F17 would have been good enough to win
R: no point really
R: I think you've lost sight of the situation, playing this kind of move is plain bad anyway you look at it. You have several chance to reduce the top, even now.
R: it is still not too late to invade but you chose to exchange this move for J14 - losing about 30pts really. As the centre is "small" when compared to the huge black corner.
R: this should have been at E14 or more solidly at E15
R: instead of this useless move black could have decided the game much easier
R: you don't need to fill this
R: this is too submissive and it doesn't really yield white any points really
This move is very useless really any of the big end move at the top where you can reduce or at the bottom
its already alive, isnt it ?  R: when he played B9 yes  you should have a lot of yose points there attacking that group from 2 directions really.
1 point >.<
R: a decisive move - remember F12 group still has only 2 eyes and this is the ladder breaker
better at a ?  R: yes but at this point you really don't have enough territory anyway
i tried to get a seki, but it clearly didnt work
Was this too conservative a move for so early in the game?  - I don't think so - shimari is most always good. D15, E4 are other possibilities (E3 of course). Or C10 to mirror.
What is a good way to respond to this? What should white do?  - I think you played it out very well. See though the variation I entered (move 10)
- not a bad result for white considering how strong Black was in the beginning.
- Normally from a shimari (circled stones) A or B would be better. If you extend in that direction C would be standard, but needs something like D of E to be complete
- Black got it.
- Maybe A?
Do you know of a good joseki book to learn about situations like this?  - I've got "38 basic joseki" (http://senseis.xmp.net/?38BasicJoseki) and I find it very good. I'm a big fan of senseis though as well.  - But this wasn't so bad for White either. "A" might have also been nice as a follow up (attacks the circled stone).
- Consider also attacking with A (see variation) then connecting with B
- "A" is be better (see variation). E18 was a mistake for Black (too low). Black can't do much in the corner, and connecting will be expensive (lots of white influence) if not impossible.
- Correct
- Here instead of jumping out I might have placed pressure on that weak black group. Moves like A-D might be better.
- Probably unnecessary (see variations)
This situation gets really messy. How should white have played this out?  - Here, Black is already connected (very alive). White should try to contain as best he can. Allow Black to separate the white groups, but make territory at the same time. J17 is not the best move. Perhaps A is better.
- In general White plays too close throughout. Try giving Black a little and keeping a bit for yourself. Go is about sharing and taking (sharing a little, taking a lot). Greed (trying to keep everything you think you have) doesn't usually work (as we saw here).
- What is this move trying to do? Filling at A, extending at B are also good.
- Not necessary. White is often following black around. Since P17 we haven't had a sente move. There are big points on the lower left corner and side...
- A forcing move which doesn't bring much.
- A also works
How should white react in this area? It later gets really messed up.  - Again, I think White did pretty well.   - Black is fighting over a center and (like White) missing big points on the side and lower-left corner.
- Small for White. Get the big points!
- Better
Was this the wrong way to defend? I wanted to block black while still having access to expand into the center.  - Fortunately, it worked well, but black could have messed things up with M6... Better for white would be M7 or tenuki
- Good, finally...
- Now that's more like it :-)
Would blocking on the other side have been better? What is a good alternative to this?  - "Block on the biggest side" is a very helpful proverb... http://senseis.xmp.net/?GoProverbs
- Interesting. Black is good at close fighting, but it just might have worked...
- or not...
- With a safety play around A, the game would be White's. Let Black have the four points...
- Good
- Again, "Block on the biggest side" (i.e. "A")
- Unnecessary.
What should white have done about this invasion?  - No need to fill the peep this time. See the variation...
- Here "A" is better. Steal Black's eyes and separate.  - Learn the eye-stealing tesuji (http://senseis.xmp.net/?EyeStealingTesuji)
- You can still separate. With A for example...
- Black knows to connect by killing C7
How could white have killed this black formation?  - See above...
- This didn't work for Black. But in general it is more effective if you keep him from getting a base with something like A (see variation).,
- Here a double hane works (see variation)
- Necessary?
- A big sente move for Black, A timely R9 would have been likewise very good for white.
- if Black had connected at Q8, white would be in trouble.
What is best here?  - "A" keeps Black from invading further, doesn't it?
How could white have avoided losing these stones?  - See above.
- Black could have gotten White with T8.
Why did black do this? Was there a risk of a white invasion?
I have very little experience with ko fights. How was this one?
- Not a ko threat. Even with a second (or third) move, White cannot live here. Fortunately, Black didn't see this.
N: after this move, very complicated fighting could follow. White should be aware of this when he plays here. (see further comment)
ce coup n'est apparemment pas 'joseki' dans cette situation, mais il semble bien possible... @apparently, this move is not a 'joseki' in this situation, but it seems possible... (LL)  N: i think white could get a favourable result, see variation for ideas
N: this result also doesn't seem bad for black, there is a lot of aji left in the two marked black stones, for example starting with a black move at 'A'
N: i 'd prefer a pincer around A, to me it looks like the correct direction of play
N: nothing wrong with the normal white move at A
blanc veut compliquer en jouant une avalanche ! @white wants to complicate with a 'nadare' joseki ! (LL)
noir choisit une variante transverse de la petite avalanche, qui évite les pires complications !!! @black chooses a simple continuation of the 'nadare' joseki ! (LL)  N: if you really want a simple variation, you should connect solidly.
pas 'joseki' !??? @not a 'joseki' ??? (LL)  N: no, why did white not play here right away?
est-ce le bon coup ??? @is it the rigth move ??? (LL)  N: i'd play the high move at A to keep a better high/low balance. You do not want to end up too flat on the left side. Also, A would have a better relation with your hoshi in the upper right.
pour la suite, j'envisage les coups A, B ou C... lequel est le meilleur ??? @ now, I thinks of a move at A, B or C... which one is the best ??? (LL)  N: consequent with previous comments, i think B is the better direction. It makes your hoshi do some work.
N: it seems you are troubled because this is not in your joseki book. You really shoud try to think for yourself and to search for reasons. Reasons in terms of shape or fighting, weak and strong groups and so on. It is true that white leaves a weak spot at A where black could invade. But because of the situation on the right, white has a counterplan to this invasion.
N: i think C is the best move, try to connect your groups, and white will have a hard time living.
N: now the black stone at A seems a bit to much.
que jouer ??? @what to play ??? (LL)  N: I think i would play at A, the difference between connecting your groups and make a big territory, or to let split your goups and have to worry about them is huge!
N: a perfect move
N: far to close to thickness.
un coup d'attaque classique... @a classical attacking move... (LL)
je n'ai pas trouvé de trace d'une suite similaire dans des parties de pro...!? comment répondre ??? @I didn't find such a variation in pro games... how to answer ??? (LL)  N: use your imagination ;-) One way is to read really good One other way you can use if you know the correct variation white didn't play: you can visualize the result white would have obtained. If, starting from the 'new' move, you can find a better result for you, you already can be pleased. This is pragmatic amateur reasoning.
N: overplay
coup naturel ; mais qui semble être une erreur !?! @natural move ; but it seems to be a mistake !?! (LL)  N: heavy
noir est enfermé, et n'a plus de bonne forme possible :-{ @black is in, and has no good shape to play :-{ (LL)
N: only move?
le résultat est catastrophique pour noir ! @the result is awfull for black ! (LL)  N: indeed
N: first at A seems better.
il semble que ce coup soit un mauvais choix de direction... @it seems that this move is in the wrong direction... (LL)
avec le bon timing ! @with the good timing ! (LL)
cherche à développer un moyo tout en évitant de venir au contact de la pierre blanche... @black is trying to develop a moyo without touching white stone... (LL)
N: you should defend your group at A, one shouldn't allow your opponent to attack a group so easily. Even if it shall live, it will cost a lot of points. On the other hand, your bottom left seems hardly alive, but i can't find a killing combination.
N: yes, playing here is better then B, as far as i'm concerned. See previous comment.
ERREUR... il vaut mieux rajouter un coup en "A14" ! @MISTAKE... black shall play at "A14" ! (LL)  N: i have the feeling you deserve the following. You need to understand the danger of weak groups and the comfort of strong groups.
tesuji !?... (LL)  N: it seems so, a logic move to stirr trouble. you are probably able to make life after A, but then it is a nice endgame tesuji.
ERREUR ENCORE... en fait noir n'a pas le choix ; il doit absolument faire vivre son groupe de gauche !... @SECOND MISTAKE... black must live on the left !... (LL)
difficile, mais c'est maintenant la seule chance d'obtenir une compensation !... @difficult, but it is the only chance for black !... (LL)
et NOIR ABANDONNE : en effet, blanc assure définitivement un énorme coin. noir n'a aucune compensation, et devrait même sauver ses neuf autres pierres en 'gote'... @BLACK RESIGNS HERE... (LL)
With the marked stone, you intended to attack his two stones at the top, but now you're deviating from that plan.
Should I of just let him live small with S14 instead? This way, he is going to break out, and if you're not quite sure you can kill him, the best idea is to seal him in, and then turn your attention to the two marked stones.
Mistake here, as S11 is now a good cutting point for him.
Doesn't seem like he even needs this throw-in  No, he doesn't.
Another mistake: he is not going to live in gote (with T15), but break out, because that way he can attack you. You should have taken sente here to strengthen your top group.
My group on top is in alot of danger now
Not a good move.
Well, you got there anyway, but now he has O14.
Too heavy, you can get good shape with R8.
Bad time to tenuki?  Absolutely,  you're giving white an excellent chance to put pressure on you. You have six handicap stones already, you don't need another one. Take the fight to him.
That's the wrong direction: the two white stones are weak, so put pressure on those.
Now white has thickness, and there is aji in the corner.
R3 instead?  Better. Now you're attacking a strong group. And there is still aji on the corner.
That doesn't do anything. Seal him in with P1.
Good move!
Empty triangles are usually bad. E13 looks better.
Big in terms of secure territoty, but gote.
When attacking weak stones like these, it's usually better to play at a distance. Attaching makes him stronger.
Beware of this shape: when white plays L4, you have two cutting point to worry about.
Mistake, he can connect in sente, and you have weakened yourself.
There it is.
Not necessary, so you give away sente again.
Is there anything I can do now?  No, I'm afraid not.
Well, you know that was wrong.
Peter: This move is unusual. If White A, the marked Black stone becomes overconcentrated, while White secure a lot of territory (See variation). If you want play lightly, you should play at B. If you want to strengthen your stone, play at C. You also can play elsewhere.
Peter: Too small. Play at A.
Peter: At A!! Hold the White stones separated. (See variation)
were there any better move to play then these Peter: See comment B 27.
Peter: Good. But there is a bad aji at A.
could he had saved this group? Peter: A seems to work for White. (see variation)
Peter: Now black is ahead, and it should be easy for him to win the game.
Peter: at A.
Peter: Looks like an overplay.
Peter: Whats about Black A?
Peter: Overplay. Must be played at A.
Peter: better A to keep the White stones separated and connect your own.
Peter: What about A now? It kills the upper White group surely.
Peter: Too small. For example: A is bigger.
Peter: Yes, I think, now the upper White group can live by cutting at A!
around here i thought about connecting at R12 was it okay to wait? Peter: White can cut at A immediately. See comments B81/W84 and variations.
Peter: B95 at A!! No fear about the cut at B. (see variation)
Peter W98 at A and the game is open again!
Peter. B109 at A!
if he played like this
Peter: W 126 at A! (see variation)
Peter: B137 at  A and the whole White group will die.
Peter: W 146 at A:
Peter: W150 at A connects.
well thanks for the rewiew^_^ hope you enjoyed it  ps:yes we said thank you for the game and all this stuff i just erased all cooments to make the sgf clearer  ps:you like the signature^^?
Should I approach that 3x3 before securing my own unbalanced corner? I rarely see this. I was tempted to play 4x4 and trade territory for influence early.  H: It is just as you say. The 3-3 goes straight for territory, the 4-4 mainly for influence, while the 3-4 (A) is rather balanced in this respect.  If you choose to play A, I see no real difference in either heading for B or attacking one of white's corners. It's a question of style (secure territory vs. early fighting).  No objections from my side.
H:  Same situation here. You may either choose to carefully extend the black corners (A, B), or head for the sides (K, D). Or you start approaching white (preventing his extensions) by playing at E.  E is fine.
H:  I'm not sure, what A aims at.  If black wants to attack white (provoking some defensive move), C might have been an option. A does not attack white.  If it is about building a stable base on the left, B would have been the right spot.  Playing A, however, leaves an easy invasion for white around D. Note that white can play a two-space jump as a follow up move independently from the site black attacks the invasion  (see variation)
H:   White did not invade. Stabilizing the marked black stones on the left side (by playing B, or even C) is a must.
H: This one space jump is always a good idea. (Though not the only option, cf. http://senseis.xmp.net/?path=PincerPath&page=44PointLowApproachOneSpaceLowPincer)
H:  The reason for playing A obviously is not to allow white build a (big) base on the right. However, I think that both, timing and position (A) are not well-chosen, and this is for the following reason:  A-B are only very loosely connected. So A is not in a strong position which would be better for using it for an attack.  Just like A-B, the marked stones below the white group are weak as well.  My suggestion is to either extend the upper right more securely (like at C), or to strenghten the lower black group before attacking the white stones. This could be done by either jumping into the open at E, by heading for some side/corner space at D, or combining it with an attack on white at F (which may lead to a dangerous fight as white may aim at disconnecting the marked black stones).
H:   this is a reaction black can live with as it allows for strengthening the connection between A and B.
H:  ...as he does. Good move.  Note that white still has no real stable base on the right (he needs the next move at A). But he has gained some influence towards the center.
H:   Good move. (Although playing around E is still more important)  Black refrains from extending the wall (A), which would have made the white wall stronger as well (B). This, however would have made the C-D groups's live even harder.
H:   black decides to rescue his group. Good.
H:   Be careful with contact moves. They tend to make the attacked stone stronger, and black is in danger of creating a clumsy group. Playing lightly usually is the better option when "fleeing" from a bad position.  Playing A would have been better. (Good shape together with the marked black stones)
H:  Not a bad move (trying to make space for an eye), but I would have chosen to jump into the free space in the center (A or probably even B).
H:  good result for black. But still just one eye.
H:   Playing A still is more lightly and not as slow as B
With backup should I have pincered him at M 17 instead of solidifying the corner?  H:   White should have a hard time anyway (black will attack from left and right). Simply securing the corner seems quite sensible to me.
H:  Good defense from black in this corner. White cannot live here.  A is possible, too if you know the L-group (cf. http://senseis.xmp.net/?LGroup)
I guess it is stronger now with thickness but oh crap why didn't I kill with T 18?  H:  Yes. Black lost 10 points as he did not kill the white group.
H:   No need to make a contact move (although it did not matter in the course of this game). A or B would have been enough to put white under pressure.
H:  Good move preventing white from connecting his groups.
H:   Actually, black does not need to attack. White needs both, A and B for this group to live. So if he plays one, black will answer with the other.
H:  Again, black does not need to attack this group. It already is dead as white cannot make two eyes with this line of 4 stones. So black looses one more move.  Left side (A,B) is still open.
H:  Good move. This is black's oportunity to push white while building territory of his own.
H:  Good move again. A helps the potential territory on the right (marked with triangles)
H:   A or B would have been better, as the (triangled) territory around C is not made more secure (and not much bigger) than before.  With A or B (or D, E, as always), black would have gotten direct points on the left side.  With black playing F, white can flee right into what could have been black's territory on the left.
H:  Defending on the lower position (A) would make it more difficult for white to settle himself on the left side. (Additionally, white may be forced to continue by playing around B. Then black may defend at C or D, closing his open potential territory around E.
H:  Not bad. The black group should be stable by now.  Alternatively, black could try to steal white's base by playing at B or A.
H:  Again a contact move thay may lead to a fight. Playing A would have been as well. Closing the B-territory is an option as well.
Is this chunk of center I am trying to circle off too big to be a true moyo? I find I am trying to build framework that may be too big and it is never quite worth what I expect.  H:  Playing A would have stopped white as weil, but black would have been in lead. (cf. variation)
H:  Dangerous. White could simply cut this stone off (cf. variation)
H:  Black is alive, now. So we should keep in mind that this group can be used for attacking and can no longer be put under pressure from white.
H:   unnecessary move. Black does not need to respond to white A (which aims at extending white's territory).
H:  Unnecessary again.  Better expand black's territory above e.g. by playing A.  Alternatively, B, C or D (with follow up at E) are points where black could make use of him being in forehand (sente).
H:  Good defense.
should I have continued pushing south at G 7 to reduce or played G 6 to seal him in a little more instead? This move feels bad in retrospect.  H:   I cannot see what G7 (A) would help.  B would have been a good reducing move.
H:  This move does not yield anything, does it? A would have earned some points on the left, but attacking white (starting the endgame) would have been my preferred choice.
I am wondering why I did not capture G 6 or try to split at J 7 of H 8 then capture. I think I wasted some moves.  H:  Capturing A would be gote (you loose the initiative). As long as your oponent needs to respond to your moves, you can play A any time later.
H:  All good moves keeping black sente.
Oops.  H:  Yes, a misreading. The double hane (marked stones) should make black double-think his move.
I think I should have run at K 14 instead, that stone wasn't going anywhere and it would have promoted better shape.  H:  Yes.
H:  Playing A would have worked as well (cf. variation).
I didn't have to do that did I? Even if I let him play there I'd have him in the same position, he is running nowhere in close quarters and I jumped at shadows.  H:  Yes.   (The important think to notice is that the black A group has only one liberty which would be fatal, if the white B group was not in the same state. White's C-group  cannot accomplish anything, here.)
Should have connected at F 7 rather than take I think. Have I played too passively generally? I feel like I am playing passively and making mistakes because I am afraid of making a mistake.  H:  As this was not the last liberty of the C group, the move was not necessary. And as you say, the left D group does not yet have two eyes! Better do something about that.  You may capture at E to connect with the F group or (as you propose) play A.
I should have played there and reduced earlier.  H:  No. You should keep endgame moves for the end game. They may e.g. help you as threats in Ko situations.
H:  A would have been a double atari.
Am I playing these in remotely the right order? I try to think about what move is worth the most points and allows me to keep sente but I think I mess up here sometimes.  H:   The main "rule" is: play moves that keep you in sente, and your moves do just that. Nothing to object.
I didn't need to do that, he wasn't going anywhere even if he took.  H:  Yes.
same as earlier, black's exchange with white has made white stronger.
This move is too slow.
I guess form here I really had no idea were to play.
This is your fatal mistake.  You should have connected your upper left group back.
ok, the biggest points on the board are in the ordeer of A to E.  A general rule is that the unsettled corners are larger than the sides than the center.  It seems to me that you are able to take most of the listed moves.
This is too small.  Black should not have answered here.
NJM [?]: Hi, have fun
pmurphy [9k]: you too.
[JB] It looks like you are not very concerned with the bottom left; but in that case why did you play 2 stones there?
[JB] This move looks heavy, I would play C18 or D18 instead (see variations)
[JB] C18 first would be good, though Q10 is also an important point.
[JB] Again, contact moves are too agressive. I prefer S16, or P13 and then S16.  First important comment: contact moves are deffensive moves and usually reinforce your opponent, and in this case your stone is weaker: Q16 is closer to O16 than R16 to R13.
[JB] and now R16 is weaker... Let's continue a bit.
PMurphy:  I thought I could get away with making life if I had two stones on the third line two spaces apart...apperantly a little more than that is required.  [JB] Right; it would be ok if they were not in contact with those black stones.
[JB] So far you have put several stones disgregated on the board, but they are not connected neither they show a clear plan. Notice that (besides P3-R4) all of your stones are weak: they don't even have a base to build eyes. I can say at this point that you will have to fight a lot to win.  Second important comment :-) You should have a plan and play according to that, otherwise your moves look just random.
[JB] This move tries to take white base out, though C13 can be easily killed.
[JB] Good, it is important to go out, and specilly if you do not have enough space for eyes.
[JB]
[JB] This move connects to R13, but since black moves at T12 and R15 can make things very difficult for white, you should think a way to sacrifice one of the stones to get out with the others.
[JB] This is a good move for black: he can choose to attack the corner or play at M3... it will be difficult to defend both sides.
[JB] But now black choose to play in other part. I think he should have played K3 now. Probably he wanted to be sure his stone could escape connecting to P5...
[JB] ... but he allowed you to make a good move, connecting your stones.
PMurphy:  Here I was planning to catch the E12 group in a ladder, but I overlooked the liberty formed by the Ko  [JB] it is not bad anyway: you can fight the ko and at the same time help your F17 stones.
[JB] Another important comment (#3 :-) When you attack a stone, if your opponent tries to save it it will come stronger. So never push your opponet against your own weak group: it will make your group weaker.  In this case, just connecting at e.g. G15 may work: black has to choose closing his territory at M17 or defending hist group at the corner, which has no eyes even if he connects.
[JB] Again, a contact move will help black to reinforce. If trying to escape you may try L15 or M15, but it will be dangerous for the F17 group anyway.  At this point, black has just a few points of territory, but because of white having many weak groups it will be difficult to keep black of killing one or more groups.
PMurphy:  This move puzzled me, It seemed like it would be easy to run it off the side of the board.  [JB] I do not think it is a good move.
PMurphy: Until this move.  Now I couldn't let them run east.
[JB] You can also play the other side, see variation.
[JB] Good one, probably black did not notice this move.
[JB] Good again: use a strong group to attack.
[JB] This is a "thank you" move. Black is happy to connect. I would have played O15, separating the black stones.
[JB] Since the white group is live, pushing black against F17 again is not good. Variation 2 shows a way to help F17 while attacking, and variation 3 shows that even if playing in other place black cannot kill.
PMurphy:  I was fairly certain I made life here, but I didn't exactly feel all that great about it.  [JB] Yes, even if it were needed, you are quite enclosed so you cannot use your group to attack or make more territory. The problem is that you played a lot in small spaces, thus having to fight for living and if you get to live, you have just a couple of points.  Notice the difference with the bottom right.
PMurphy:  Until this move by black, I thought I could kill black in the corner  [JB] I am not sure black could be killed at the corner, but A16 was not good to start. I have put three variations beginning with D18 instead of A16, in that case black will have to win the ko and escape to live.
PMurphy:  This also caught me off-guard.  Is the white group on the left unconditionally dead after this?  [JB] This "monkey jump" leaves white with no eyes at the side. The only way to live is to escape, but it looks difficult: you can try to attack the F12 stones, but there is still the ko, and it will be very difficult to connect to the N4 group anyway. As I said before, by playing your stones so unconnected and abandoning the place after a couple of moves made a lot of weak groups, black would sure kill one or two.
[JB] If you wanted an eye here, see variation.
PMurphy:  I figured I could run to the center, and black even gave me a chance to form a bamboo joint...but where was I running to?  [JB] Exactly. You need eyes or connect, and both are difficult.
[JB] I would prefer R15, but anyway white has no eye space.
PMurphy:  I had no idea how to respond to this
[JB] Your answer was ok, but now the standard move would have been T13. Black has to connect and you can make two eyes (see variation).
PMurphy:  At this point, I was reasonably certain this white group was unconditionally alive.  [JB] Yes. But, at this point, remember again: you were all the game trying to make your groups live.
PMurphy:  Trying to connect those groups, would J8 be better?  [JB] I think it is not possible to connect if black does not commit a big mistake. He just needs to push your stones against the big black wall.
PMurphy: After I played this move I noticed J6, I didn't take that into consideration when I moved H4
[JB] As you can see, since black is so strong at the center it is very difficult for you to invade. In that case is better to try to reduce, though the game is over now.
PMurphy: And here's where I resigned.  I would have been willing to play out the continuation if I had saved one of those two large groups, but with both gone it was surely a lost cause.  [JB] Ok. I will try to summarize the things I most noticed: - do not play contact moves so early in the game (unless they are part of a well known joseki) - try to imagine a plan and follow it, do not play random moves in so many places - do not push your opponent against your weak groups - do not push your opponent if you do not want him to reinforce (unless of course when you are pushing him against you own strong group) - try to learn a few joseki to use in case you do not know how to begin... of course one should know which joseki to use in each situation, but I have still to learn that :-) Best regards, Jorge
Flameinice [2k]: hi Raina [4k]: hi
Of course, this is the correct play. But in a handicap I would choose some faster play, like another kakari (approach) to the top right stone.
I was taken aback by this move because I haven't come across it before. How to respond?  Its good you haven't, since its wrong of course. This kind of bottom-kosumi (with regard to the d10 stone) can be used for invasions, when you don't expect much more than making life. In opening black should try for more.  Either block is possible, I would prefer the other. Most natural continuation follows and is clearly bad for black.  Genrally, triangles are right invasion spots, squares are wrong.
Best resistence for black, not taking into account that its bad as whole.
This must be also possible.
Another strange move by black. So strange I lost my wits and didn't know how to punish.  Wicked move :) needs some reading. Most simple would be D8 connection now, but doesn't work (variation)
Atari canot be good, after black connection you can cover both D8 and D6 cuts. If wan't to play it your way, connecting without the atari would be better.
You are giving black easy time. You must attack him fiercly and try to force him to finally capture on b6, which would harm his corner a lot.
Should I have protected at C14 first?  now its late
bad move from black.
This kind of move is good, but it's not too powerfull when black has the life-saving connection at b6.
Keima is too weak, black cant play this loosely. Kosumi is normal.
On your place, since you have the stones at c,e 5, I would play the e3 peep.
Another move that I hardly ever come across. Bad result for white, or is he just helping me strengthen my stones?  Yes, this only helps white. Black normaly wants to save the corner by e3. Without this exchange, e2 later gives him chance to capture f3 next. Now the chance is lost.
white is alive now, gift from black.
Black didn't read this. What does he plan to play against f5 cut?
It's not possible to ignore this kind of peep.
D12 would be better as can be seen from the continuation.
This is not possible...
Terrible result
Game switched from won to a bad one.
The F5 cut is still operational, but far not as good as could have been if used properly before.
White barely survived, gained nothing, while black gained lot of points. Chances to win now seem low.
A desperate (therefore) bad move by me. Should have been around K16?  K16 area is not promissing at all. You cant get any points on the top with the weak cental group. The group can be left on its own for now and you should play away from it, so you don't damage it.  Problem is that san-san is very passive, you can't play like this if you want to win. For example q14 would be an active move.
Crude attack
The difference looks small, but it's a good example. The k16-k17 exchange lost lot of aji you had there. Quite possibly you might want to play k17 or L16 instead.
You should se that this direction is wrong. First - you don't need to play here at all, the san-san lives. Wall is nice, but not when its black to move and neutralize it.
No idea what black is trying
Adding prisoners maybe
No need to answer, the group looks out also on the other side. You missed your chance here.
Black answer here is way to small.
Direction is right, but I think this is to soft on the black on the top.
He caught his breath
His favourite move :)
right direction. but... (var)
Before answering, I would lean on the top group to make more space for maneuvering on the bottom.
O-o, gote
Black didn't get that much, its still better for white. But it shows why pulling the p10 stones out earlier would be better.
B has no reason to answer this...
Why this? Its a dead stone.
Also bad. Why do you respond to it, when you can take it?
The game looks rather desparate lately and will remain so, so I will finish the comment here :)
Black's still ahead by a lot, isn't he? :(
Should have just liinked at S15. :(
Should've been at C15 for damage control. :P
Here black 'escaped', but he'd probably done it so many times that he ended up 'forfeiting'. I'm not sure, but I think I was about thirty points up here. Thanks for reviewing my game, I hope I'll be able to learn much from your comments. :)    Thanks again,  Flameinice  Black lost lot of points on the botton right and he also let you connect the right side, that won you the game. You sliped with the left group earlier, but looks like the strength difference was vast enough to win the game anyway :)  Good luck with your go!
crux: This is a narrow extension from your two strongest stones.  Seems neither big nor urgent.
crux: I'd prefer A first, to reduce the space available for White's group.  See variation.
crux: In light of White's invasion here, Black might have preferred to spend the previous move in this corner, rather than adding another stone to the strong group at the top.
crux: This is somewhat risky, since the ladder that emerges doesn't work for Black.  Normally, Black can play A instead to get a ko.
crux: I think Black has a better line that leads to ko.  Even if that were not the case, the game move does not help Black make eyes, and should be kept in reserve.
I see D7 group as weak and C12 group as weak for white.  C10 group and D5 group are weak for black.  Maybe Q18 group is weak for white, too, if black has sente to play R18.  crux: Black's lower-side group is the heaviest of the four.  The Q18 group is probably quite strong enough.
So I jump out with my weak group.  crux: How about A instead, using a contact play to get settled more quickly?
White is pressuring and getting territory, but he did not strengthen either weak group.
crux: Moving slowly again, inviting White to strengthen his weak group at the expense of Black's left-side stones.  Maybe an attachment at A would work better.
I don't want to respond to this move, because my E10 group must survive, and white is trying to create pressure on this group by hitting the group next to it.
crux: Poor style, pushing White onwards.  Black could e.g. jump to B, which leaves White with no easy way to force by pushing some more.
crux: Now Black has a weak spot at the top, which will help White settle this group more easily.
crux: Black could also consider A.
again hitting a nearby group to attack my main weak group by building up.
White's shape is bad, but I needed to play L8 first.
Here I want to attack the M9 group, so I press on the other group.  But he senses this and give away the group I am directly attacking.  crux: Maybe A instead, so that White is contained?
So he is out and I must find 2 eyes here.  And my whole game falls apart quickly.
game over.
backpacker [2k]: thx rinset [1d]: thx
This move is considered an invasion (called the 3-3 point invasion, or san-san, from the japanese word for 3). At this point in the game it is a bit too early for an invasion, so you might try a corner approach instead. Although this cannot be a terrible move, it is probably not ideal. Consider the triangled moves as large points.
This seems like an overplay, and your cut was a wise decision.
(follow up with these stones, they are not dead yet)
I find this move to be a bit strange. It seems to be a bit too overconcentrated in the area, and doesnt seem to help your shape out much.
Also, this move seems a bit unecessary. If you were worried about this group dying, try working on life and death problems at goproblems.com or buying a book. This group should live, as it has ample eyespace. Notice that if you were not worried about the life of this group, this move actually takes away a point of territory from you, as well as wasting a move that could be spent elswhere (huge defensive move like C17, etc)
I tried to analyze whether white's cut at G12 was dire or not. And it seems that white can probably do some damage with it, so this is a good defensive move. The variations are other possibilities that you might consider.
This is a large area, but its hard for me to say which is more vital at this point, H11 or here.
This move is quite unecessary compared to a defensive move at C17. think of the diferences (lecture coming in a few moves.)
This is a very important lesson in go, and if you remember one thing from my review I hope that this is what you remember. Think about what happens if white captures K10.   1. Does it greatly affect the life and death of surrounding groups?   Not really, G10 is very safe.  2. Does saving K10 put much pressure on any of white's stones? Not that I see. Perhaps a cut at K9 becomes a bit more attractive, but nothing extroardinary.  So after realizing that saving K10 doesn't have much affect on large groups or large territory, lets think about how much it is worth to save it. about 1 point of territory + a bit of potential at K9.  Now lets think about how much a defensive move at say C17 is worth. (look at the variation)  It is vital that you learn to spot moves that are tiny in the scheme of things (worth around 2-5 points when moves at C17 could be worth 20 or 30)
this move is TINY =(
This move is not a bad idea, but it is not worth as much as say C17. You should defend this spot now!
And see, now white notices how big this move is.  Its important to notice that as it stands, this invasion is going to be a success. So now your job is to pressure white into living small, and make a big wall for yourself. The joseki goes as follows
Nuro [17k]: e17 for w better?  M: this is following the joseki so far, but your next move deviates from the joseki, and is the culprit of the poor result you mentioned.
Nuro [17k]: instead of d17
Also, you should at least fight white. try extending from E17.letting white capture E17 is actually HUGE. follow the variations and see that allowing this stone to be captured is much different than allowing J10 to be captured. The main difference is:  1. Does it affect the life/death of groups in the area?  YES! saving E17 puts a great deal of pressure on C17/D17 and will allow black to make a wall in sente. Furthermore, it means the likely death of E16 (look at the variations, play some out, think about what white can do).  So one thing you need to learn is which stones are junk stones (not worth very much, dont affect large groups or large territory, for example J10) and which stones are key stones, (stones that mean life and death for certain groups, stones like E17 here).
See now you have to protect this cut, white seems strong in the area, and he really should not be, he's invading. This is mainly due to the mistake at E17, not at G18 (G18 might not even be a mistake, just a deviation from the joseki)
and now white pierces right into black's precious territory. This is very unfortunate, as the top was black's main area of control.
Just to show how big saving E17 was, compare the difference between this position and the one in the variations.
Also, this is a minor tactical mistake that ended up having a large point-value since it let whites b14/a14 group live, whereas it probably would have died. notice how this makes bad shape (empty triangle, highlighted) and it leaves black's stones with only 2 liberties! you've got to be very careful when making moves on the edge, and next to enemy stones, as they leave you surprisingly short of liberties.  Just take your time and read out the situation. perhaps you were pressured on time here. If not, make sure you're reading out your enemy's next moves, it should be pretty obvious here that white will play C15, and i'm sure you can read out that sequence. In general though be quite cautious on the first line, and ESPECIALLY cautious in corners. crazy things happen in the corners.
ouch =(
Key points:  1. Look at my comments of J10/E17. Learn to recognize which stones you should save and which stones you should let go.  2. be careful on the first line! you're already one liberty short when you play there. Tactical errors were not such a great part of this game, and your reading ability will improve with practice.  3. Dont get caught up in local battles when there are much larger points on the board (this relates to J10/L12 and is the lesson i hope you take from this game.)  4. As a final note, if you're goint to sacrifice stones (which is okay, provided they're not vital/key stones like E17) use their aji (aka potential) to wreak havoc. I'll provide some examples here as variations to show my point. (look at C4 and P4).  I hope you enjoyed my review as much as I enjoyed reviewing your game. Good luck in the future, and remember to always ask yourself whether a move is tiny or not. And dont make empty triangles.  my name is Mike on KGS, although i'm not on very often.
myksouth [15k]: good game myksouth [16k]: man, my clock was scaring me ... myksouth [16k]: im no good at being rushed fushina [15k]: thank myksouth [16k]: thankee fushina [15k]: no you very well fushina [15k]: i'm lucky myksouth [16k]: good too. fushina [15k]: thank for the game fushina [15k]: bye myksouth [16k]: later
Not sure if my move number 6 after his move at 5 is good, seems weak  Your response is more commonly used after black A.   You could have played 1 which is a little less passive than F16 and quite straightforward.    You could also have tried a pincer at 2-4, which would have worked well with the marked stone.
Don't think I would have played move 10 against a human... reaching too far but I thought maybe I could get by with it since it was a computer  This is why it is best to play people :)
I think A would have been better for black
Didn't mind how this came out??
Didn't expect him to play here thought he would continue fight in the other corner?  Black has made a mess of the top in my opinion.
I remember that there is some joseki play here that I am supposed to make but couldn't remember where so I thought I would go back up and solidify the other fight   I think black is so weak in the corner that A isn't needed so playing elsewhere is better. I choose B as one of many possible moves to illustrate this.
I'm not sure this move is needed, there are much bigger plays.  See move 23.
I expected some type of attack here but didn't really know the best way to respond
This move is ok.  Given the weakness of the maked stones a pincer may also work, white would welcome a fight in the upper left.
I suppose I should do something about this now very large moyo black built up but I really didn't have any good plan for it so I decided to go back and attack the single stone
This move seems really stupid now but I think I was at a loss as to what to do strategically here   This would be better, black is already strong and at least he will be deprived of points.
This move mattered, after b2 white has limited eyespace
Black is really confusing me ... playing all over the board
How is this for approaching the big black area  Good, I think (see earlier suggestion)
1 to protect territory 2/3 to keep black groups seperate 4 not needed
Not a strong shape
Okay now I'm really worried abou this big moyo
Is this the best move for black in this situation  Perhaps R5 first
I think I could have handled this upcoming fight better???  This move doesn't work for black, better to press white against the right side   You could have responded at A
Was this a helpful move... trying to make the corner unit live  White is dead here, but black didn't spot it
Can't I do something here to cut these stones off  No, you are cut off and need to live
Black can get a ko at A
Don't think I needed to play there but assumed move 79 was a move to cut my stones  It does make things easier
A Is not unconditoinally alive B Is very weak You are not attacking the territory you have invaded at C  Recommend 1,  2 or 3 respectively
This was an important ko, you needed to fight.
A was the obvious move here
This is computer play
I'm sure I could have done much better here but I was happy to survive
How is this move?? wasn't sure where to attack at this time  Black can deal with this
A bit passive
was this move good here or too early?  I think it's a bit early but it is worth at least 8 points, creates a ko threat and ensure the white group survives without fuss.
You shouldn't ignore this if you thought D2 was worth playing.
These stones are dead.
Blue: I wasn't certain about this move. If I want to extend from the top left to protect, is this the best place? Given the D4 stone? Or is it safe, in which casre should I do something bigger?  Kirsten: If you want to play on the left side this is the right place for an extension. But I would prefer playing an approach move against Q3 now. There remains a weakness on C12 then, but it's only a territorial aspect, your stones don't have to worry.
K: I think B should have played j17 instead of m17, then he can leave out m17.
Blue: Would a low approch have been better? Are there any general guidelines as to which is for which situation? What are the aims of each?  K: This is fine. I don't know about general guidelines, only one thing: If black has an extension around K4, Q5 is not so good most times, because it can be attacked easily. Then a wider approach at Q7 or R7 is preferred.
Blue: I don't know the 3-4 josekis very well. This is just something I have to learn.  K: Me neither.
K: this blck move is not joseki, so there should be a good way to handle it.
K: as black I would be happy about this move, because it strengthens me towards the top side.
K: This groups is being hunted much too long. There were various possiblities to make life, for example with te cut. Which is still open. This way you are giving B to much solid territory at the bottom.
K: very bad black move
K: very strange, he should defininetely connect defend at Q8.
Blue: Foolish?  K: Doing something about B's moyo now is urgent. But R12 is too low, you should play like this if you have the space for a 2-point-extension.
K: I wonder if this is really sente...
K: There is no space to make a life at the side.
Blue: This feels bad: either run or make a base, but don't do both.  K: right.
K: S9 wasn't sente at all, and it still didn't do anything for the group's life, there's only one eye at the side, which was also there without S9.
Blue: Before this move and the next, I was (apparently) winning. I chose this move to get points. Was it a bad choice? The next invasion cost me a lot.  K: I don't think you were winning. The marked area is neutral area. But I think D3 is ok, it's miai, you lose territory either on the side or in the corner.
Blue: A badly read out jump.
Blue: This too felt bad, on reflection. Perhaps something like G8? Or are there bigger moves I'm missing?
K: I think C18 is the biggest move now, regarding sente and gote in the continuations it's worth more than 15 points.
Blue: This just didn't work. It may have if I hadn't played P15 first...  K: P15 was aji keshi, that's right, but in this case I think R17 shouldn't have worked anyway:
Blue: The game basically enters endgame now. I made a few msitakes after this which may have sot me the game considering how close it was. Any big moves I missed? Tesujis I should know?  K: Well, B got C18 which was very big. Everything looks solid now on both sides, and I think your endgame was much better than B's, B is more than 5 points ahead now.  I will end the commentary here. The main problem in this game were your 2 running groups. The first created some influence on the outside  towards the top, but it was no compensations for B's territory at the bottom. The second group got out better than it should have, If B had attacked it better he could have started further attacks for example on the left side. Because of your running groups B had the time to make solid territory, also at the top.  I hope you enjoyed the review and it could help you a little bit. If you have any more questions on the game feel free to ask me again.   Kirsten
igor > I would play F3 here
I felt I was playing wel up to this point. I planned to break up his right side with my next move.  igor > black is doing well.
I answer his approach with O17, per my readings in Learn to Play Go Vol.II.   igor > It is ok, but I would rather play at B as it has more influence on the top side
I felt I had enough room to live in the upper-right, so I went to make sure I had enough on the left. I think I should have played near the lower-middle or right-hand star points instead, or F16 or C17 in order to break up his area more.  igor> B is not so good, in my opinion. I would also consider R11 as the next B move.
This leads to a massive upper territory on his part later on.
igor> black 19 is not urgent. I would rather take C or B
He gets the right star-point. It would have been much different had I played here as I said earlier.
Trying to break him up so he doesn't claim the whole right side.  igor> a reasonable move
I think I could have played R8 here to split him again.  igor> both moves are good, I think
Trying to surround and stump his right territory.
igor> I dont't like b29, as it makes white stronger, helping to build base on the write side. Better would be to invade on the top side (around E17). Invasion at C17 will help white to build a wall with influence to the center, which is not good for black.
Invading, finally.
igor> now black gets a corner, giving up the top side. it is better for white.
I was worried with his 34 play. I figured I'd have to fight well to stay alive. I did, but lose it all in the end due to a stupid blunder.
I felt I was okay in the upper-right at this point.  igor> I am not so sure. I would rather try to run to the center and to connect to P12 group. P15 or Q15.
I was trying to split his O15 stone from the upper-middle group.
I know, due to my stones placed as they were in the lower-right, that the corner was mine. White was making me prove it, which I felt I did well.
I held it!
Just to make sure...
Trying to reduce White.
I saw E18 and saw the ladder! Unfortunately, it doesn't work. I was so happy as I played my next stone.
...and then I realized it was for nothing.
I didn't even realize it was atari on C8. I wanted to stay connected to my D6 group.
Just for influence later.
Trying to sketch some area out in the lower-right middle.
I felt that I could get more territory in the middle, but it didn't turn out that way.
igor> moves 119-123 were not necessary for black. It would be better to concentrate on the middle of the board to gain more influence. Up to now, white has a strong wall on d7 and has neutralized the black wall on p14. I would also try to reduce the white territory on the bottom.
Here, while I couldn't see it, I felt sure I could kill the D17 group with this peep.
Now, I wasn't so sure.
Was going to try to cut in at J17 and try to kill still...but I was realizing quickly that it wasn't going to happen.  igor> white has two eyes, so it is impossible to kill the group. black 125 is a thank you move - white is glad to connect the groups.
Now my J17 pair is cut-off.  From here, is there anyway to save them?  igor> I don't think so.
Still trying...it seemed right at the time.  igor> black has no chance to survive - not enough place to make two eyes. If you plan to surround the group n17, you must cut at M16 (but it wouldn't work also :)
Now it was clear I was just giving White stones for free.
igor> too small. H10 would be better
The sequences involving the stones around the middle-left was quite confusing for me, and led to my problems. I was very confused in this part.
Cut-off! I figured, "No problem, I will just connect to the right side."
I figured I could still connect at my leisure to the right (the stones at K10 to the M8 area).
Trying to cut into White's potential territory around H5/H4.
With 60, I was afraid White was going to cut into my area around N7. In the process of trying to hold some territory there, I didn't realize I was getting totally cut-off from the J10 group that needed to connect to the lower-right to live.  igor> I would rather try M10 (see variation)
igor> bad shape
Is there anyway to save my K8 group?  igor> difficult. Maybe you could try to connect to the top with H11 or make two eyes with H8.  But both opportunities are not sure.
A desperate hope that he would not play G12.  igor> too late. a double atari two moves earlier would be better. Now it brings nothing.
From here on out, and over the previous few moves, I was just trying to limit White's territory where I could. I couldn't see any opportunities for invasion against White. I was also trying to extend where I could.
Trying to get the S6 group. I try to cut whenever it is available. Even if it doesn't work out, I learn something about fighting usually.  igor>  before you try the cuts that do not work, you should make another reasonable moves. For example, defining the boards of the top right group, bottom left group and so on. Such cuts may be useful for you if you have a ko fight.
The big blunder.
Double atari.
Dead in the upper-right. I resigned.  igor> Even if your group would live, white was leading about 50 points. The main problem was the middle group. You should secure the group much earlier.  Nevertheless, I was quite surprized with the game. I would estimate your rating much higher (or my rating lower :).  In the end of the game you were tired and make some unreasonable moves. It was an interesting game. The beginning was quite good, and your main mistake is that you play too thick. white built up more influence in the middle, playing lighter.  Best regards,   Igor
[Rich] - generally, advice is to approach the white stone, that way you don't give white the choice of how to approach. But this is also a big point, so not a bad play.
[Rich] - This move doesn't force a response, make territory or build much power. F17 or C7 are bigger.
I'm never really sure of the best way to defend an attack such as white's g3 here or if he plays g4 either  [Rich] - It's not an attack. An attack threatens your stones, this is an invasion. His stone is weak and needs to make eyes.This sort of move is good, but the stones on that side are already fairly strong, so a Very Useful Rule is:  Attack from the weak side.  You'll strengthen your D4 stone, start walling off your corner (to make plenty of territory) and can chase him out. See variation.
I decided to play a bit defensively here and strengthen my top-right position, but perhaps it's a bit too defensive? Maybe I should have been concentrating on saving that bottom-left corner?  [Rich] - this still doesn't seal the corner, I don't think. A play like Q17 would have been steadier. But yes, a play like C7 or D7 (to put more pressure on his weak group) is needed. The following order of importance is almost *always* the way to look at things: 1) Stabilise your weak groups 2) Threaten his weak groups 3) Take a big point 4) Stop him taking a big point.  D6 would be 1 and 2 together!  This is also an illustration of why you should attack on the weaker side :)
[Rich] - To defend, use contact plays. To attack, steer clear of them. Contact plays make both sides stronger. See vars.
[Rich] - this is excellent for white, you're sealed in, which is good because all his stones are still playing an active part int the game, while yours can only affect that small corner at best.  I think you're dead there if white moves first.
[Rich] -  A bit like N17, this is a half-move. It doesn't quite approach the white stone, doesn't quite settle territory. F17 or F16 would be ideal here. See var.
[Rich] - Big mistake by him. As you saw, he should have played around D14. You took good advantage.
I decided that I wanted to prevent him getting a large area on the left side  [Rich] - Excellent play. Again, why a two-space approach? A play at C14 would be more threatening to the corner invasion and give you more room to spread out when he responds. Large knight's approaches to the 4-4 point are quite rarely seen.
[Rich] - it's almost always good to anwer a contact play if you're planning to save the stone, skipping away leaves your initial stone weak.
[Rich] - two ignored contact plays in a row! Cancels out, I guess... :)
[Rich] - I think if he'd played C2 here, your corner would have died. See var.
[Rich] - you got the key point :)
[Rich] - this is big for you, making sure you don't get shut in. b14 is also very big for you, he is almost forced to respond and it helps you get eyes.
[Rich] - he should have played b13 here.
[Rich] - this is just endgame, a couple of points. The hane at D14 is much moch important, or a play at E14 or G12.
[Rich] - this is a small move. It doesn't pressure your group, it tries to make points from thickness. Another Important Rule:  Don't try and surround territory using influence or thickness.
Again, perhaps this is too defensive?  [Rich] - Waaaaay too defensive :) Especially since you've already played a pure defensive move here at N17. P11 is bigger, or G11would look to expand your centre and restrict his.
[Rich] - Why back towards your stones? P11 surrounds a much broader area. Expand! :)
[Rich] - you don't need to play here until he plays E11. E10, F11 or G14, are both bigger.
Maybe I should have tried to expand my territory more here, perhaps with k13 or something?   [Rich] - Absolutely! No more half moves, be ambitious! It's always more fun to lose (and learn) because you're too ambitious than because you're too timid, anyway ;)
I wasn't really sure of the best way to deal with this invasion...   [Rich] - good start, I think.
[Rich] - this is where you lose points. A play at J15 is perfect, he's down to two liberties and will have to struggle to escape. See var.
[Rich] - fortunately, he fails to extend at J15 and you get a break :)
[Rich] - this is very small, jumping out at N8 threatens to jump into his right side or his centre.
reid: Hello Amar.  Let's start here.  White oten plays at A or B in this situation so that he can continue with a two-space extension no matter which way black pincers.  In this game, white has chosen to approach the black corner instead.  That means black should concentrate on building the upper-right framework at the expense of letting his lower right corner stone suffer a bit.  The best way to do that is to attack the white stone severely.  The problem with black R9 is that it is not a very severe attack (which is why it is not often seen).  Black C and D are the normal pincer attacks in response to the approach at Q5.  These moves maximize the upper right framework for black while limiting white's responses.
reid: This looks like a good result for black.  White didn't really take advantage of black R9, and instead played a normal joseki move with P3.  Now R9 is in a good position (R7 and Q8 would be too close to the strong white formation).  Also, white R4 could lead to problems later - this shape is not great.
reid: White probably needs something here, but the result is very overconcentrated.
reid: this is very good for black.
reid: White is in a difficult situation already.  The black P2 stones and the white R4 group have similar territories, but the four black stones in the upper right are an ideal formation compared to the three left and upper side white stones.  Black is ahead.  Black can play safely and consolidate his win.
reid: Approaching the corner like this after white has already played the K16 extension is a bit like closing the barn door after the horse has already run off.  Black's territory is already a bit better than white's, so there is no need to rush to reduce white's territory.  By playing close to the corner, black allows white to pincer and make effective use of K16.  If black wants to approach the corner, one line further away (either A (D14) or B (C14) gives black more space to work with.  If white still pincers, black can attach at C, for example, to make light shape.  But I think simply playing at D or extending to E is good enough for black.  White's top-side framework has a problem because it is open underneath (F), and there is no easy way for him to close it off.  White G is too over-concentrated, and white H is not sente (and may have problems later - the black corner is very strong).
I'm interested in what you think of the sequence for here and if you have any other ideas.  reid: Well, the severe pincer with C13 is an ideal way for white to punish C15.  Black could lose his advantage now.
reid: This is the normal move, but white's natural response at F16 is just too good.  I think black needs to try something different here: maybe black A or B.  If A, white will probably push and cut leading to a difficult continuation.  Black B expects something like white C then black D to counter-attack, leaving some aji in black C15 for later.  But everything is difficult for black, mostly because white already has K16 in place.  C15 was just too close.
reid: Black H16 is joseki, but in this case white already has K16 in place, so everything changes.  I think black is not going to come out of this very well.  Joseki books admonish us that black A for white B is terrible, but here, when white already has K16, it's probably not bad (after white B, K16 is better at L17).  Then black could attack with something like C to stabilize this group.  black D is still a (yose) problem for white.
I think this was a mistake for me. J15 would of been better?
Tsuijin [1d]: i wanna see a 2nd line move!
reid: white should atari at A first, of course.
reid: White did better here than black - he has caught up a bit.
reid: These last 20 moves have been better for black than for white - black solidified his large corner while white increased his area only about 10 points or so.
sorminator [3d]: h3 not better?  This seemed big but H3 also seemed big. In the end though i did get a piece of the centre so I'm not sure.  Center moves often seem bigger than they really are.  It helps to consider the *incremental* gain of each move.  Without M8, black's corner is about 40 points (assuming white reduces somewhere around N11).  Adding M8 increases that by only about 10 points (assuming white reduces around L10).  By comparison, if H3 makes a five point gain for black, or a 5 point gain for white, that is a total of 10 points, making it as big as M8.  But that's not thw whole story:  H3 isn't the right point.  If white plays, he'll attack the black bottom group with J3.  And if black plays, he wants to go all the way to G3 so he can try to activate the aji of a corner invasion around C5 or B4/5.  So the bottom is really a more important move.
sorminator [3d]: ^^
I felt I had to make more in centre now.  reid: Unfortunately, there is no territory to be made in the center - there are white positions already neutralizing any further potential.  Instead of trying to make more territory, I think black should be trying to use some of the aji that's scattered around.  For example, black A threatens to cut off the K12 stones with B while also threatening to connect the dead G16 stones with C.  While it may not work right away, this kind of aji is a valuable asset that you should be trying to turn into terrotory, and ultimately, a win. Black D (B5) is another possible weak spot.  Best of all is if you can work two or more weaknesses against each other (A and D seem to be too far apart to make that work, but it's still worth thinking about).  I'm going to stop here. There is a fair amount here for you to work on, although it's rather subtle stuff for the most part.  Watch out for center moves: make sure they're really are as big as they look.  Don't try to reduce your opponent's territory if yours is already bigger.  Don't attack and take risks when you're ahead.  Don't try to take center territory if your opponent already has positions that reduce it.  Good luck, play strong,  reid
dN21death [2d]: sry about that xD Prodigious [4d]: Hehe Prodigious [4d]: No prob
Linlith [6k]: J13 for B may be interesting
dN21death [2d]: nice one xD Prodigious [4d]: :>
ff - This is a little unusual.  The top features two star point stones.  The situation there is symmetrical and stable.  The bottom features two unsymmetrical corners and is unstable.  It would be more typical for Black to continue with a play along the bottom, either enclosing the bottom right or entering the bottom left.
ff - White's pincer at K17 is very rare in professional play when there is a Black stone on the star point in the upper right.  I think it is because the relationship is not quite right if Black plays in at C17.  See the variation.  As a result, I think that Black's choice of C14 here was not that good, better would have been C17.
ff - This play does not solve White's problems with K17.  It probably would have been better to attach at F16 or even D14.
I wasn't very happy with the result in this corner: my position feels too small and low.  Is this a reasonable result, or if not, what should I have done?  ff - Up to the previous move White and Black have played out an old corner variation dating back to at least 17th century China.  Typically Black would now play elsewhere here.  With the pincer in place at K17, Black might want to play J16.  The White wall has no eyes and has to worry about the outcome when Black puts the original approach stone in motion.  The play at C11 is not good.  It has no real purpose.  Naturally White turns elsewhere.
ff - This play aims at invading at M17.  In this position, however, I think the greater potential for Black is the shoulder hit at J16 to make trouble for White's wall.  Therefore I think Black should have answered here with R14.  See the variation...
My response to this move gave me a weak and cramped shape - but I really don't know how I should have responded.  Was the pincer ok?  or should I have started somewhere else entirely?  Anything you can tell me about the sequence from here up to mvoe 30 would be most welcome!  ff - See the notes to the previous play.  Objectively there is nothing wrong with fighting against this stone.  However, White has defects in the upper side position that may get naturally repaired as both sides jump out along the top.  This may make the result seem unsatisfactory to Black but this is not necessarily the case.  Let's look at what happens here...
ff - This seems the natural approach.  See the variation...
ff - This play is bad shape.  It is dead in the middle of various alternatives.  It has too little impact on any of the White stones.  See all the variations.  I have added without comment some lines seen in pro games.
ff - There is no way that Black should have answered in the corner here.  The action is on the right side.  Black should have punished White by ignoring the mistimed play at Q18.
ff - White continues to play in the wrong place.  See the variation...
ff - This is a very aggressive idea.  The normal approach is to play from weak stones (in this case the upper stones that are almost surrounded).  N12 is a more reasonable approach here.
ff - White lets Black get ahead here.  See the variation...
ff - Black correctly ignores S14.  If White wants to connect along the second line, Black should have no objection.
ff - This is an extremely dangerous idea by White since the 2-space jump can be cut.
ff - Black extends the left-side position.  This threatens to give the initiative back to White in the center.
ff - White answers passively.
I'm never sure about moves like this - any comment would be welcome!  ff - This is an excellent play.  Black is instantly strong while White is correspondingly weak.  Meanwhile assess the result at the top.  White has run along the top in a very low position.  White still has not secured even 20 points of territory.  Black's territory on the left is close to 15 points.  Black's position on the right side is already a few points of territory and Black's stones have far mor potential to make additional territory than White's.  Go back to Black's comment on R12.  Should Black be dissatisfied with this result?  The answer is clearly no!  Black should be happy.
ff - Quite a natural reply.  Black starts to build a large area on the right side.  But what if Black tries to exploit White's weakness more directly?..
ff - This is a very strange move.  It is dead gote.  Black has retreated from the fight.  The previous play strengthened the White stones facing the Black center and now Black plays a defensive move aimed at the Black territory on the right side.
ff - This is a slack play.  White "takes advantage" of Black's previous gote move by connecting along the bottom.  Black should say thanks and get on with the game.
ff - It is not clear why Black makes this play.  We never find out since White demonstrates that it is a mistake in any case.  Black should have made the usual reply in the corner.  White's connection is fundamentally not a good idea here.  See the variation...
ff - Bad shape.  It earns Black sente but fixes up the bad aji that White has in the upper right corner.  Black should just answer at Q10.  White has not yet gained anything in the upper right.  Black is ahead right now.
ff - This is a very large play and Black is ahead right now.  However, it shows that Black is not really aware of the potential here.  Black should be most interested in the sequence at S16, the cutting play and F18, and the alternative cut at E14.  Because of all these the center is full of interesting, unresolved potential.
I'm unsure about this move - looking at the board after the fact maybe I should have played at G3?  I'm really not sure at all.  ff - Realistically this should be enough to win easily for Black.  If Black plays G3, White absolutely must play a pincer and try to complicate the game.  This play or K3 are better here.  I agree with Black on K4.
ff - A seeming forcing play that attacks the connection to the 5 black stones in the upper right.  Actually this is a blunder by White.  Black should calmly ignore it.  See the variation...
ff - Tactically incorrect.  If Black wants to answer from this side (presumably to protect against a White attempt to cut in the cener), M13 would be better.
ff - White blunders in return, protecting maybe 10 points of territory at the top but letting Black repair the hole in the center group.
This invasion gave me a lot of trouble.  was the positioning of the K4 stone bad?  or is there something else I could have done?  ff - This kind of invasion is all about fighting power plus situational awareness - what is a satisfactory result?  This requires that you have an idea of the score.  If this stone lives and you are behind, then you have to go all out for a kill.  However, that is difficult.  If the stone lives but you still win, then your job is easy :-)
ff - This offers White an exit at L5.  It is fundamentally a bad shape.  The Black stone on K4 is not strong enough to stand on its own and the White stone at N10 limits what Black could expect to make in the center.
ff - Now Black is embarrassed to have played M6...
ff - Black has to consider very carefully what is reasonable in this fight.  The Black stones that extend up here add little to Black's right side position and do not really connect to the Black top.  Meanwhile White's stones grow in strength and threaten the bottom Black group.  I think that Black should play from the weaker side, which is the bottom here.
ff - Once again White turns away from the center of the action.
ff - Black begins a series of forcing plays - that finally force White to surround the Black stones and nearly kill them!  Black should take the opportunity offered by White P2 to play elsewhere.  Since White has invaded Black's area and already escaped, Black should be happy if White comes back to make two eyes in the space around N3.  It is a small space whoever gets it!  By the way, this play is bad style.  It does not help Black's eye space and it does not hurt White's eye space (K7 is already a false eye).  It also loses the potential to force the two White stones at J7 and K8 into a shortage of liberties.  It is much better left unplayed.
ff - This play looks too honest.  White will force Black without mercy...
ff - This is incorrect shape here.  Black should connect solidly...
I think both players made some mistakes in here - I suspect I got lucky to live, and probably my mistake was to get into this situation in the first place - was there a good chance to avoid being surrounded?  ff - See the preceeding comments...
ff - Black starts to wind up the game.  However, it is really too early for that...
ff - At this point White can be cut at F8.  The bottom right White stones have only one eye if Black plays K2.  The left side White stones would only have one eye (by capturing B9 in gote) if Black played E10.  Finally, Black can cut White at E13 as well.  Black should have this in mind as the center is settled.  However, I no longer see how Black can exploit this easily.  My comments end here.
This was a straight forward misread on my part.
It's pretty much just a straightforward yose from here on without much interest to it, though if there are any obvious mistakes I woulnn't mind knowing them =)
Black's lower-right group's shape with white's marked  stone isn't very good.
Surely this way of playing cannot be good for black. The  probe at A is no longer very effective and white has a  large side for black's two small corners.
Again, A seems better for black than the san-san  invasion.
all black moves seems logical to me, BUT... black is low everywhere... which is a problem ! (LL)  Yes, you are exactly right!
locally a big move... but perhaps not accurate taken to  account the global situation ? (LL)  Yes. This is usually played when white is not so strong on  the side and/or when black's corner is bigger than this.
Some other possibilities are C and D.
too territory oriented !? (LL)  Yes! Way too slow! White is building and beginning to  solidify a big moyo.
white has built a very big framework !!! what was black's mistake ??? (LL)
A is better. The only way this might be reasonable is if it  allows for expansion on the side, which white's D10 stone  stops.
This seems to be a move to just increase your territory in  the center, which isn't very strong since there is still a very  big point (marked).
a difficult situation... (LL)
good shape ! (LL)
This move simply does little. Black marked group is weak,  when black could have connected. It's important to make  every move worth something.
a mistake !? (LL)  No, these stones are very important.
black resigns : white is ahead by about 30 points. (LL)  Overall, your middle game was very good, but your  opening was too hard to recover from. The biggest thing  to do is to remember that in the opening, it is very good to  try to have both territory AND influence.  Youquestions and thoughts show that you put a lot of  thought into your game, which is very good. I recommend  learning different corner fuseki for certain situations and to  remember that the san-san invasion is not always best.  Thanks a lot for letting me review this game! It was very  interesting, especially the midgame. Good luck on  improving!  Andrew
This is an odd move, usually only played when white has a position around A (K16) in order to attack black.
A high approach to a 4-4 stone is unusual. It gives away quite a big corner, although white gets a lot of influence which makes the result almost even.
Making this exchange now is perfectly good. See the variation for a more complicated alternative.
White is thin while black is strong. You have to be prepared to make use of this later, by invading boldly when the time is right. Otherwise, white has got away with stretching too far.
This is unusual but seems ok.  See the variations for the "book" lines, instead of H3.
Good fighting spirit.
This is a powerful move, but w can surround the corner in return. Then white becomes unattackable, and H7 is less useful. Keeping white weak is very important.
blas [4k]: I think that till now I've made no mistake  You need to start thinking about the importance of weak and strong groups. I would say that H2 was a bigger move than D6, because now white has no weak groups at all while black has H5 floating and has just played R6 as well.  White hasn't made many points so he may seem behind, but H2 is a good move that invests in the future. We've only played 20 moves out of 200, and if black has to spend the rest of the game defending, he will surely lose.  It's not bad to have weak groups, as long as your opponent is just as weak as you.
A sharp move. White can fight hard here, because H2 means he has no worries.
blas [4k]: This is a good answer attending to the many faces of go's joseki diccionary, but I dont know if with k3 is still a good move  This isn't good. It's a third weak group, while white has none, and so is an overplay.
This is bad, as it makes black stronger. Moving out directly is better.
blas [4k]: I think this is bad. Now I have two weak groups  Three, in fact. See variation.
Trying far too hard.
I have doubts about this move because...
...
...
...
...
...up to here you have let white push right through your position. You should recognise that this is a very big loss. If you could at least cut off white's cutting stone then you might make a fight of it, but in this position your stones around O4 are nothing but a burden.
This is too heavy. If you think about it, this stone serves no useful purpose and is only dead weight.
Very good - an attack on this group would be very severe.
blas [4k]: I hae problems to know when is time to reinforce weak groups or to make territory. I think this is a good move and that my groups are not weak enought to avoid this move  It's a hard decision, but I would play something around A, as a double-purpose move - defending a group and sealing off the centre. This move is big but only has one aim, and there is only so much a single stone can do.  White has yet to play on the top left half of the board, but he is thick everywhere else and has some solid points. I think that if white plays actively and uses black's weaknesses well, white can win from here.
Here, this move is excellent. C10 is perfectly placed
blas [4k]: This is bad and put me in trouble  This is fine, certainly the best move. White overplays but unfortunately you let him outmanoeuvre you.
blas [4k]: Now is time to reinforce  Yes, but now black looks very thin and it's likely that something will die.  It's also worth looking at the left side. Black left the weak groups to play C10, but white has destroyed the left side anyway. Not only that, but the invasion was sente because black has to come back and defend his weak groups afterwards! The weak groups make it easy for white to do whatever he wants.
blas [4k]: Thi move is the key
blas [4k]: this is small, now he´s ahead
blas [4k]: Now I think I can win if all may groups live, but I dont know well if its possible  I think you're right.
I think you can probably live, but you need to save pretty much every stone to win.
[Broege: probably the simple answer would to play A. Then White B and Black C follow.]
[Broege: According to Kogo's Joseki Dictionary Black should play A here. This puts some more pressure on White 3-4 stone and gives Black the corner.]
[Broege: This move seems too tight. If you wish to escape to the center then perhaps A or B would be better. And if you wish to live safely - how about C? Please note however, that I'm too weak to properly read joseki - so this hints are based on intuition rather than reading.]
[Broege: The joseki move here is A. This move is again too tight - Black stones are over-concentrated which of course is a waste. If one plays a defensive move (which is needed here) it's best to choose one that has some other value as well - like creating territory, giving influence, attacking the opponent or just giving a good possible continuation(s). The move played does not give Black any territory (I bet you considered the triangles are your territory) nor does it weaken White in any way. The joseki move increases Black territory slightly (squares) but it also provides a possibility for a good yose continuations - like monkey-jump into White territory.]
[Broege: Now Black side begins too look like it has too much stones and too little actual territory. If needed White could play at A and cut the Black side at either B or C (or live under the wall). Perhaps a pincer at D or E, which also aims slightly at the triangled White stone, would be better here? A pincer looks even more promising after visualising what will follow after the move played (and what happened in the game): White will create a stable group in the lower right which also strengtens the triangled stone pretty well.]
[Broege: A slightly better local move would be at A - it's both standard shape related to the triangled stones and puts at least some pressure on White. But I think Black should aim for some global move here and try to make a foothold at the left side. If White ignored this move (which luckily it didn't) and played somewhere around B, Black could have a hard time reducing the created moyo.]
[Broege: Playing at A gives Black more room to live in but I think White move could be ignored here.]
Was it a good idea to touch here? I was trying to get more territory...  [Broege: Generally there is a saying that one should not touch the opponent's stones as it usually only strengtens them and weakens one's own stones. If you wished to enhance your potential territory A or B would be better. The problem here is that White managed to enhance its influence first - and by always answering White moves you risk that it will continue to enhance its influece while reducing yours. I think that here the best proverb to apply would be "the best defence is attack" - think of all the space on left side and around top-left corner. If you reply to White, White will play there first. By attacking (preferably with some sequence ending in your sente) before replying you take some gains of your own choosing and can then defend without the fear of loosing more opportunities.]
[Broege: Now you can see that White stones are only stonger after the touching move. And the Black stone seems somewhat lonely and cuttable.]
[Broege: Good. Perhaps playing here earlier would be better but as long as Black managed it before White it's OK.]
[Broege: Personally I'd play A here - it doesn't leave any weaknesses behind. After the move played, White can play (in yose) A itself and reduce Black territory quite a bit - see the variation.]
[Broege: White must be feeling (if a computer program can feel) it's quite ahead now as it already plays yose moves.]
[Broege: This was not that necessary. The possible continuation for White is not that painful for Black - so extending to A (which also attacks three White stones) would be better. In fact this it probably the biggest Black's weakness - answering White too often instead of attacking on Black's own terms and gaining as much profit as possible. It's worth to remember that by answering the opponent's moves one cannot win the game - which I'm sure you found out yourself in high-handicap games as I did.]
[Broege: This move does not change much - White can still play A and close Black in the corner.]
[Broege: Now the touching move seems irrelevant. If you wanted to continue from it play A would be the way to do it. The move played does not seem to achieve a lot - for enhancing Black territory prospects A or B would be much better. For reducing White top perhaps Black C and running into the center would be the way.]
[Broege: Answering the question from the move #51 (the next Black move) - the mistake is here. Rescuing this stone meant that White had a good way into the Black potential territory. The rescue was still possible a move ago - now it should be abandoned and Black should play A.]
Should I have played Q13 instead?  [Broege: As stated a move back - it's already too late to protect the whole side and the touching stone. Playing A indeed would be better - but as in the variation marked GOOD.]
[Broege: This is a mistake - there is a serious cutting point at A that Black will need to cover. It's better to play A immediatelly and accept the fact that White has already destroyed part of Black right side.]
[Broege: Move at A would be the better shape to rescue those stones.]
[Broege: Try to play ahead of your opponent - like at A. Please see the variations on what happens when White pushes further in both cases.]
[Broege: This allows White to play A. Playing B would create a stronger shape and allow Black to go furhter into the centre.]
[Broege: Touching opponent stones again - Black A would cover the same weakness and create a stronger shape.]
[Broege: Now White has pretty much won the game. There are no more comments except for answering direct questions and some occasional comments on local moves.]
Was it too long?  [Broege: I'm not sure White could catch this stone - cutting it from the right side would most probably allowed it to connect to the left-side group. But this is rather irrelevant - this area was not anyone potential territory yet - so it would be better to play some bigger yose moves creating own territory directly - A, B or C are some candidates. If you wanted to protect against White taking the centre - why not start safely at D or E and build from there?]
[Broege: A would be slightly better as now White can play there (in proper time of course - this is a small gote move) and reduce Black further.]
[Broege: This could have been played instead of A as a way of applying pressure on White.]
[Broege: Playing A first would give Black some more space - please see the variations which show some of the final versions of this local situation.]
[Broege: Why not play A first? A is sente - if White ignores it the triangled stones die. So most probably White will play B - see the variations to see the exact difference.]
Was it overprotection because of my stone at S2? Or was it good to play safe here.  [Broege: It was necessary - see the variation.]
[Broege: This is too small - it only gives Black a half-point ko.]
Overprotection?  [Broege: Definitely not - see the variation.]
This was stupid, I know... Should h.  [Broege: Well, I believe White would find more ko threats anyway.]
That was supposed to be a Ko treat...  [Broege: Only a move too late ;)]
chars [13k]: ty
Kichiro: weird position to play for the opening. I would advice to keep it to the triangles.
Kichiro: There a bigger plays at the moment. Forget about the corner until the biggest plays have been made.
Kichiro: Both here and the variation you created are a little bit strange. The marked black stones are too strong to be attacked like this. You pose no threat. It's far better to create a little moyo. Potential area for expansion. Than to start attacking this early.
Kichiro: This move doesn't do anything either. The variations below are better moves for attacking the black stone which is now very very weak. Also don't fear him connecting too much. If you do play L18 because it's a slightly more offensive move and builds more for you.
Kichiro: Far too low to have any potential. Totally relying on the opponent to make mistakes that will make it viable. I hope I'm not sounding too harsh. But I get a feeling this was a I'll just play somewhere where I think I need to play, but not thinking about the actual placement of the stone.  Circles are better points in the area.. Triangles better plays in general.
Kichiro: Overplay. Doesn't do anything at all.
Kichiro: These aren't good moves for black in the position. But he does see that the rest of the board is still open. And C10 does put pressure on the top left for you. Which could have been avoided if you didn't try to lure him into a fight with M3 which isn't enough of a threat to do anything.
Kichiro: This move is ok'ish. Because it connects. I can see why you think this is important. But a better move would connect and make some potential for building a better shape. And maybe put some pressure on black.
Kichiro: This move is bad. I'll show the correct move.
Kichiro: This was a mistake from black. If he hadn't made this...lucky you :)
Kichiro: Empty Triangle.
Kichiro: A little too late. Before J11 it would have been perfect as the earlier variation shows.
arnfasta12 [12k?]: can we continue this game later? I've gotta go arnfasta12 [12k?]: I'm US EST chars [13k]: ok no problem
QUESTION:  MAIN QUESTION: BASED ON OUR LEVELS OF SKILL AND THE GLIMPSES OF PLAY STYLE YOU CAN GARNER FROM THESE MOVES, WOULD WHITE HAVE BEEN ABLE TO CAPTURE AND SECURE THE MIDDLE AND UPPER RIGHT.  ALSO WHAT ARE THE CHANCES OF SECURING A HOLD IN THE BOTTOM CENTER  Answer: The upper right yes. The middle yes. Depends on who is the first to see the urgency of a move there.  The triangle is an important move for both of you. I'll continue the note on the next move.
Kichiro: I think there are some basic flaws in your game at the moment.  1. You go for the throat too much. Try not to lure the other person into fights with empty moves. Either make a really strong threat which has to be fought for. Or and this is way more important look for better moves on the board to improve your overall position.  2. You play too much without thinking. Maybe you play too fast, which I think you do. Not always, but sometimes. Like playing very low or attacking positions that are just too strong. This is of course linked with 1.  3. You're shapes aren't strong enough. You have a tendency to leave them alone for too long and think it will all work out. Which the upper right demonstrates perfectly is that it doesn't. Try to make sure your stones are secured.  If you can't become more patient try working on overall board situations and moves that automatically make sure you're shape is strong. Defence seems to be your greatest lack.   Good news though. You don't fear taking risks. Which is invaluable it will help you learn. You show good insight in fights as well.   If you can't seem to work with the board positions etc. Try to get the basics and make sure you become a lot stronger with the fighting. Since it seems that's your "thing". Maybe it's more enjoyable to you and things we enjoy always help us learn.   I hope it was helpful. Good luck on the path to go mastery.
Kichiro: nice ko for black. bad for you. :(
If you are working on improving your fuseki, I would recommend using more basic moves.  Sticking to 3-4, 4-4 and 3-3 still gives you alot of variety and complexity.  Jumping into the 5-4, 5-5 and beyond is at the best going to give you alot arguments about complicated josekis.  And at the worst, it's going to confuse the game so that your reviewer is not going to even give good advice! :)  That being said, I will do the best I can with my limited and imperfect knowledge.
So, here it is hard to say what is the best direction of play.  There are several areas to choose from, I've marked A-H.  First, consider big moves, the simplest way to consider big moves is to look at the space between them.  That puts moves D and E at the top, as well as H and A.  Next come B and C as well as G and F.  The next important thing to consider is urgent moves, moves that dramatically change the local situation.  For instance, moves that threaten the life of a group while building outside thickness (or other such gains).  For example a play at A would probably have white play at B, a play at B would probably have white play near A.  So A or B are black's sente, and you should consider them if you are sure you know which one you want.  For instance, if you played A, then (after white's reply) played H, you would be building a nice framework on the bottom, already threatening to be 60 points or so.  But perhaps this is not your plan.  A play at E for instance, would be OK if there are no urgent moves, and you have not yet decided which way to play your sente against white's groups.  E would be building up strength at the top, allowing you to attack more severely later.  It is also a play along the largest side of the board.  G however seems to be picking a fight, (which is OK) white should probably fix at S5 and then perhaps black can play H. forcing white to get out (say by leaning on G).  This would strengthen G, letting you build a second framework along the top.
Please see the variation, I think maybe white is leaving a serious weakness.
I really didn't want to be surrounded, for I wanted to fight for influence. But I know I may surrender much more than I should... Thought about N6, but I'm not sure there wouldn't be any disruptive answer (can't read it out so well)... Any suggestions ?  As pointed out white has problems.  Getting out is OK.  but you must consider a counter attack as well, use your stones to the left.  A move at H4 would be very nice.  I would probably play it immediately, but playing this first is probably OK too.
To me, Wn9 would have given him an outstanding shape into the center.
Played too fast  See variation on how to cut.
Good cut.  However,  these stones are not very important yet.  Notice that white's group is already strong on the left (one of the groups you are cutting).  The one on the right only serves to disrupt you group which is not yet weak (it is out, and also next to a very weak white group (please refer to earlier variation when black plays S5 -- here you may do that or play S2 first at least before cutting).  So, perhaps you should not play L1 yet.  But at least S2 first then L1 would maximize local profit.  Alternatively you may directly attack white and not worry about taking cash yet.
These moves by white are helping black alot.  white should just play S5 while he has a chance.  Without playing these moves, white may sneak in at S5 or R16, for instance.
I'm never sure which side is the best to block... I thought Q17 would just give me an overconcentrated side structure and not so much compensation. Am I right ?  Yes you want to block on this side.  Generally you block in the direction where your largest area may be built.  For instance if you had a stone at N17 you would not block towards it (playing Q17) since that is only 2 lines distance.  Instead you would block towards your Q11/R10 stones since that is 4-5 lines distance.
This is generally wrong.  It's more important to continue with P18.
Now you see, white has made a major mistake.  He must first P18 before playing S17.  Here black can simply play P16.  (See variation)
Here you have fixed in an overconcentrated way.  See variation.
White probably cannot afford to play low anymore.  He has to make his own framework to compete.  However, at this point the game is already lost.  Please count:  A - 15+ points B - 15- points C - 10+ points ----- 40 points at least for black.  D - 10 points E - 5 points F - 20 points ---- 35 points at least for white.  However, it's black's turn, the C area has a huge potential to grow, much moreso than the remaining left and right sides.  Playing tit for tat black should be able to press his advantage for a 15 point win.
A good strategy, however playing at C7 would be more efficient.
Seems to me W is very gentle here...
This move does not really threaten anything, white should jump in to reduce black center.
At this point we may add 35 points to white, bringing him up to 70.  Black however we may add 40 more points bringing him up to 80 points.  Still black leads comfortably.
I'm still a newbie at attacking, but W will have it tough here !!  It seems that white cannot live here, at this point the game is lost.
Curiously... you don't have to reply (if white takes, you may play F10).
Seems really not relevant to me now.  This a non move.  Big end game moves include S7, B9 and B14.
This move leaves behind a weakness at S8.
(I know... ^^ )
Something more aggressive ?..  You are in the lead you don't have to do anything fancy, instead you may play C9 or fix your problem at S8.
Just to be sure he dies, but useless..
Good choice.
[kb]: Keep in mind at this point Black must use his high stones to his advantage now.  Otherwise, territorially you will be ahead, so it is to your advantage to keep the game simple and not let Black develop big spaces.
[kb]: My feeling is that this probe is a little too early.  Since Black has already played high enclosures, he is very likely going to play for the outside; this, then, has little use as a 'probe', since you already know how Black is going to answer.  Keep the game simple, like playing at C8.
[kb]: Now because Black is so strong in the upper right it is urgent to defend on the right side, but then Black will get C14.
[kb]: Painful!
Is this an overplay?  [kb]: Yes, it is - especially after Black's moves in the upper right.  Probably better to simply reinforce the corner with A, B, or C.
[kb]: You had better cut.  Playing like this lets the top stones come under attack too easily.  Also, you can't expect to get everything here.  You do have neighboring stones, but Black got to play first in this area.
White is pushing from behind. Is this bad?  [kb]: Yes, just make shape here.
[kb]: Now the cut at E13 isn't really a threat, and it isn't clear F11 is helping White at all on the left side.
With J17 present, is this an overplay?  [kb]: You have no choice.
[kb]: You cannot play this way very easily.
[kb]:
[kb]: Yes, you must get your dragon out.
[kb]: This leaves major weaknesses behind here.  Better to not play here at all then to play G10.
[kb]: Ouch.
[kb]: Play at F8 first
[kb]: This is the wrong direction for Black - it's better to keep running.  Splitting two groups with one is always a sure-win strategy.
[kb]: H8 is sente!
[kb]: Good combination.
[kb]: Nice, this is a good ko for White.  You have made your outside dragon almost alive and you might get a whole bunch of stones in the process.
[kb]: You must respond to this ko threat.  You still have a bunch of large ones.
I wanted to use the dead group right away to attack the D3 stone, but i totally misread the sequence.  Is it better for white to play around K4 and try to win by a small amount?
I did not see this obvious move.
[kb]: Coming back here to connect is slow and heavy - don't do it.
[kb]: Now Black will eat some stones.
Looking for a place to resign...
White resigns.  Thank you again for reviewing this game!
MarsAttack [3d]: hi
Oioioi [5k?]: thx!
:) i usually start with the Chinese opening
Oioioi [5k?]: hi gg
is this ok?  * Better to exchange A for B first.
:) i am not sure about this move  * There are 2 problems with this move: 1. white will always answer on A, this move expands white moyo more then black will make territory. 2. move is on the 4th line but white will the first one to be able left of this destroying the potential points black had.
* This is not a good move, problem is that it does not grap points and it does not really weaken A either. Better to play around A this will enlargen your moyo and prevents whites moyo expanding.
* Good move.
:) i wanted to create a really huge moyo there.  * This move is too late now, see move 39
is this ok in this situation? if not, please show me what should i have done  * This move makes it white easy to life as well as he get a lot of points in the corner as well. Normally you should try to prevent clamping to a weak stone because with will strenghten the stone. Also if you think it is not possible to kill white, make yourself as much territory as possible and let white live small.  Yout decision should depend on the score on the board as well. White has: right side: app. 55 points,  bottom: 5  So in total around 60 points.  Black has bottom: 8 points left bottom: 15 points Top right: app. 20 points. In total 43 points. Black has to get over 20 points to win.
* Wrong direction, play A (to get some points) ot B  to prevent the white group from linking up.
* Better at A or B. A. will cut the white group B.  Will prevent eye-shape for whit so white will have to connect. Then black C   Another problem of this move is that white gets more points by answering then black get by playing here. If you want to prevent white from expanding play around D, if white answers on the right, play E to link up and expand your moyo.
* This is a huggh move
* White should simply link up. Also because Q18 and B 16 are sente for white.   Game will be close
I hink white F18 would have been better
hehe, i'm not sure of this move either
* Unfortunatly a cut G9 does not work
missclick here * Costs at lot of points.
Oioioi [5k?]: missclick Oioioi [5k?]: :P
*Better at A. Now after white B it is not possible to capture the black stone.
* Move 141 - 147 I assume you with a limited time left, otherwhite this is giving away a lot of ko-treats. Better to play  A directly.
i think this isn't necessary
Oioioi [5k?]: T_T
Oioioi [5k?]: oh
* Mistake from white.
* I do not think this move is already needed:  A, B or C are better (C is the best move).
? i didn't understand this move from White
* Better at A or B
Oioioi [5k?]: u play tooooooooo good
Oioioi [5k?]: thats it
Oioioi [5k?]: hehe
FR: In the game I played A. Was it proper way to use J17 stone? What do You think about B (E17) and C (E15)? RS:  I think A is correct.
RS:  This is odd.
FR: What is bigger localy: this extension or taking E15 (tenuki seems doubtful to me, because white C10 make my wall useless) RS: difficult to say.
FR: Isn't it aji-keshi? Was simply jumping at P9 better? RS:  I don't know.  But you could try for a base with R7.
FR: I wasn't sure about this cut, because my group is weak. Was there better moves (like jumping to M9)?  RS: This is becoming difficult.
FR: In the game I played A (L9). Is variation, starting from B (N11) better? RS:  I would say A helps you and attacks white.
FR: was O13 better? RS: I don't know.
FR: Now i think, that R15 (variation) better for black?
FR: Wasn't it better to play B(M17) first?  RS:  Yes I think so.  B is good shape.
FR: Wrong direction? Was B (J14) better? RS: No, I think he must play here and save his N16 group.
FR: Same question :)
FR: Now A (G16) looks like a thank-you move  :( Is variation, starting from B (H15), better? Or what to do  now? Is it still possible to attack white, or it's time to survive myself?
FR: I have made some variations for the next few moves, trying to find better moves for black. I will be happy, if You comment them, or show the right way.
RS: too agressive .  You have the weak groukp at J15 and K13.
FR: Only strenghtens white :( E15 seems much better. Can black kill upper-left (variations, starting from E15), or there was way white can live (i cant see)?
FR: Was starting ko from B better, than sacrificing G13 in exchange fot left side?
FR: Not the best spirit to play :(  Can you show some more active ways to save  Q9 stones and attack/reduce white?  RS: I think this is good because you connect and make this group alive.  Your only other choice is to run to the center.
RS: Tiny.
Good, you ignored his tiny move.
FR: Now seems doubtful, D5 better.
FR: Not the great reduction, but strenghten white alot :( Now I think, that it was better to invade the bottom?Would You show some ways to do it?
This white group is already solid.  He should not play moves near it.
FR: Is it ok or extending to L7 more urgent?  RS: This is better than B.  B does not accomplish much.  His stones at L8 are alive, so playing near them has little value.
FR: Misread:( no need to defend
FR: Another big mistake, but I wanted to kill badly :(  L3 look like right way to reduce, isn't it? RS: yes L3 would have been good
FR: Is it still possible to do something, or now time to resign?
[Nexik] Tenuki looks possible but playing at S2 is also good.
[Nexik] This is questionable. It is better to play at S2 to fix black shape.
[Nexik] you should leave this possibility for the future. there is many way to play in this area and you don't know yet which one is the best
[Nexik] Looks ok but personaly i won't play this kind of move because there is many gaps like C3 C8 and C10. Instead I would play one point jump
[Nexik] Exchange looks good  for white. Black should first play at s1
Black lost points on bottom so he should fight  like a hell with one space jump
[Nexik] You should defend at K18
[Nexik] This is no a ko threat you have on at H19 but the biggest point is at O2
[Nexik] lossing move you should play at o2 End of review
Kirby [1k]: thanks fp [1k]: thanks
mooncity [?]: hi
This is joseki, right?  unc: This is actually an overplay by white. This way of playing is good when there's another white stone on K16 because it cramps black's group, but otherwise it just lets black extend one more space comfortably, so you're fine here :). In addition, black can still invade the corner at 3-3 as a big yose point (see variation)
So far, things seem pretty even.
The pincer seemed especially good here with the stone at K17.  unc: This way of playing is okay, the other usual move at Q15 (Shusaku's kosumi) is good too because it builds up your moyo on the right side.
Too passive?  unc: O3 is a big point, but there are bigger areas on the board. White has just tenukied after approaching at P17, so the first thought is for black to punish white's premature tenuki (see variation). In addition, white is building a large moyo on the bottom left corner with a double-wing formation from D4. Compared to K3, O3 is a much smaller point, so black might want to play more actively by invading white's moyo (see other variation).
My idea was to complete my corner and respond to the approaching stone.
Trying to pressure the white stones. I should've protected the corner, based on what happened next.  unc: This way of playing looks okay. Adding a move to the corner would make it overconcentrated.
Should I have been able to kill this?  unc: Hard to say, but either R3 or R6 will die; black is content either way. S5 is the proper move.
unc: O5 neither makes territory nor defends any cutting points. Better to attack at Q17 or reduce at K5 now. White can also treat his two stones lightly now that he has gotten compensation in the corner.
White managed to live in the corner, but the marked stones seem very weak, and my position still looks ok to me at this point.  unc: Black is overconcentrated in the lower right corner, while white is treating his stones lightly. White has profited from this sequence.
I wasn't sure if I should do this or not. White seemed to be playing the joseki in a different order.  unc: This way is okay. P15 is also good for building up your moyo on the right side, allowing white to live small in the corner. Building up your moyo is worth more than the corner at this point.
Presumably, white was counting on my response there to be able to make this invasion.
It seemed by forcing white to defend here, I could also build up a strong position from which to attack the invasion.  unc: White's invasion here was unreasonable to begin with. A splitting attack is the right idea here as white has 2 weak groups. Q17 is a bit slow though, better to jump out directly, maybe arond Q14.
unc: This play from white is slow
My position seems really strong here, and the invading stone is starting to look vulnerable to me, but it lives anyway. Did I do something wrong or am I reading this wrong?  unc: Crawling on the second line to live is always painful, as black's wall is looming over the right side now and white has gained maybe 10 points from that sequence. M18 is also sente against the corner (white should crawl once more). R13 should not be able to live.
unc: Unnecessary
unc: White's next atari at N7 will be painful. Black cannot ignore the attachment.
Trying to get out into the center with this group.  unc: This group is completely alive, so there is no need to run into the center. There is also no points to be had in the center for black.
White has managed to reduce my nice looking wall to absolutely nothing. The position here is looking very very bad for black.
Connect down to the bottom group.
Outside contact instead?  unc: It doesn't matter, black won't be getting many points in that area either way.
unc: Playing this way is unreasonable when white has a stone on F3. See variation.
My opponent later suggested this group was still weak. See chat messages later in the game.  unc: D2 is a ko for life. If white takes that point, C1 becomes false and the entire group has only 1 eye.
This ko seems necessary to live here.
mooncity [?]: If u dont connect D2, the left corn will dead dbstraight [14k]: if you take i have b6, which if you ignore, i can make another eye with mooncity [?]: That's OK dbstraight [14k]: if i'm wrong... i'm losing anyway, so
Figured I could trap something in or at least reduce some territory here.
unc: From 160 on is rather submissive and helps white secure his large territory on the left. Black should instead invade white's territory and hope to connect out somewhere.  End of comments.
Moving out as best as I can into white's territory.
mooncity [?]: I dont have enough time to tell u more, mooncity [?]: Maybe NEXT time we can play, maybe I can tell u more  It's over by this point, but there were so few moves left, I just wanted to play it out. I think my opponent wanted me to resign here, which would've been fine, but it seems to help me to know how MUCH I'm losing by.
Was this too big? I thought it would be ok due to the wall on the left  Sirkut> Your joseki was good here, except that I don't think the exchange was even.  White has recieved a strong position defending a large corner, while you ended up with a wall facing another white corner -- you'll have to defend the other side of the space before you have definite teritory.    It's also better to attack in a way where you're playing off your existing positions so your attacking stones can have some support.  See variation on move 5.
Sirkut> This move is a little early.  Q2 or O3 are quite a bit bigger. If you were defending that side from a possible pincer, then I would have liked C6, or something like E9.  See variation.
Should I have pincered here instead?  Sirkut> I don't think pincering would have been a good idea because your corner isn't very strong yet.  If your corner group ended up having to fight for life it would get messy quick!  Here you can just let white expand as far as their comfortable until you're happy with the corner and it will probably be an even trade.
Sirkut>  I think that sequence went perfectly, other than this being a ver defensive move for white.
I was trying to reduce him as much as I could without loosing sente  Sirkut> Doing a great job so far!
Sirkut> Personally I would try and keep it from getting complicated by using more direct moves, like the ones indicated..
Sirkut> Since you didn't have to worry about white breaking through your wall immediately, it would be better to invade before forcing white to fortify - like by playing N10 instead...
after I played this I wished I had used the cross under instead
Is there a better way to defend against this cut then what I use, or should I have just played more solidly to begin with?
WOOT! I figured he could have made life, but I really enjoyed that kill, lol  Sirkut> Yeah, nice job!
This move is usually seen as a mistake by black.
This is probably a mistake it hurts R6 a lot.
I thought it right to spend another move to confine black in the corner. Was it??  yes, it's one of the things you can actually get done with this "joseki" (I wouldn't call it even though) The down sides to this is the ladder aji, which black takes advantage of.
C14 is a big move black gets for free
Could I have got N2 earlier at any time with sente??      No black would not have responded to N2, or shouldnt' have to.
again spending a move to confine. Now how should I use that thickness? When should I attack R8??
I'd ignore here, treat those stones as light, and try to attack R8, you are behind now and if R8 gets off easy then all of black's groups will pretty much be strong.
Is O17 ok or where' better. i did not know whether to pincer f17 or to extend on lower side or to play on the right??   This is definently more active than pincering F17, if you pincer F17 it would be likely that black would try to counter pincer in some fashion.
this just makes black stronger and H17 much weaker you are helping black.
all this does is remove a lib of yours
So he stopped the invasion on the right but took gote to do it so I now have time to take territory somewhere lse. Again is H3 area bigger?   H3 area is big, after white extends there the push and cut at D6 becomes very big, but to treaten the cut white must extend all the way to F3.
Maybe I should have captured F15 at some time earlier because he can now build moyo in middle. However I can get compensation elsewhere as game. What do you think??
I think he could build moyo in center instead?? moves like L10 perhaps?? Should I instead have been playing in the center to reduce him??       Reducing him directly sould be ideal, but it's also hard for black to play a move that makes it hard for the N4 influence to not get in a bit.
this move is not good, it becomes easy for white to manipulate this stone
gote but big? maybe N1 bigger? Is there danger here if he pushes with K5 in combination with a cut at c2 and e2. was I lucky here.  N1 is sente and M1 does not work for black.
Not needed, if white plays that black can T12
D: I figured I could try to use a standard opening and take sente, then punish the unstandard opening move.  M: Please note that the 3-5 is not "unstandard" --- you can find more information about it at http://senseis.xmp.net/?35Point or in Kosugi and Davies _38 Basic Joseki_.  In this game, the opening accomplishes its purpose; your opponent ends up with lots of outside influence on the top, bottom, and center.  That's a lot of words to say that while you can respond to this move, it's not a mistake to "punish".
D: He forced me to cross (I prefer a horizontal or vertical opening since I can play more symmetrical).
I thought I could punish this because of the flat movement.  M: The most important issue on the board right now is not the upper left.  (Yes, there may be issues with it, but black has sketched out a corner, as is her right).  The big issue now is to play in the unfinished corner (the lower right).  I've sketched out a few possibilities.  The basic idea is that you get corner territory while black gets outside influence.
D: Should I have done a more solid peep or was this close enough? Or cut directly  at C17 or D17?  M: It is far too early in the game to consider cutting or attacking.  After all, if you make a move like C17, black can place a third stone in the area.  You are thus at a three-to-one disadvantage.  Attacks like you are discussing are better done after you have some backup.  Note that if you aren't playing in the lower right, since black's corner faces the left side, it is a good idea to play on the left to prevent a large extension.  But I think this is too close.
M: Notice that black now has two corners and some outside influence.  In the variation, I show what happens to your move if black attacks.
D: 2-point extension?  M: Do you mean A?  If so, then no.  In the variation, black will just cut off your stone at A and probably still take the corner and outside.  It is still too early to attack.  (A 2-point extension is usually used to create a base for your group, not attack another group.)  You can create a base at B or start extending at C.  D and E are also large moves since both face the shimari (corner enclosure) in the lower right.  A basic proverb: in the beginning, choose size over the attack.
D: Probably should've gone D16 to protect the cut.  M: Agreed.
M: A small note here.  Moving near the black group this early has removed all of its awkwardness (the long knight's extension from E17 to B16), while not gving you a living group.  In short, your opponent has gained more from your moves than you have.  Try to play large moves in the beginning over small attacking moves.
D: Tenuki good? Or was this a wrong direction of play?  M: Well, your three groups (A, B, and C) are safe, as black's groups (D, E, and F).  So playing in a big area is a good idea.  And certainly, the right is a large area.  You might ask if you are comfortable with the pinch at R10.  If you run, black can settle and gain another living group (see variation).  For that reason, you might play around G so you have a two space extension on either side.  You might also consider the fourth line to combat black's emphasis on the center with the 3-5 plays.
M: Note that right now, the left is of little interest to black.  You have two stones (K3 and R8) which are useful for limiting black, but that you are not defending.  The top is also of interest to both of you.  So I believe the left, while very large, is not your best choice.  Consider the variations.  If you really like the left, consider a move that connects up to the marked group (say, A).
D: This move seems odd.  M: Agreed.  Black has moved into an area where she's already pinched.  This is good news for you.  Why not kick?  (See variation.)
M: Okay, here's another basis rule: "when touched, touch back".  In other words, your basic options to consider when your marked stone has been approached like this are either A or B.  With your move, Black has the advantage until move 34, builds up a strong wall with potential in the center, and leaves you with some weaknesses.  With A (see variation), if black wants to build that wall, she has to push from behind, and you end up with no weaknesses.
M: Notice that you have two weaknesses here at the numbered cuts (and that you don't have the ladder for 1.  Again, some of this is due to your choice at move 26.  A better choice than F9 might be F10.  See the variation for how to handle the cut if you play F10.
M: I understand this response, but overall this is a very small move.  Black gains maybe one point, while you secure about six points.  Note that with the stone at A, you were already undercut.  Instead of this conservative move, you might consider something like B.  You protect the cut at 1, give help for a cut at 2, and start to move the group out.  Alternatively, you can make a "big area" move on the top.
M: Here I think A is a better response --- again, it helps with the cuts and moves out better.
D: Should I have continued to walk to make a more solid wall?  M: The problem with continuing is the weakness of the two marked stones.  In the variation, I show some possibilities if you go to G11.  With the aji of E14, there is the potential for some nasty fighting.
M: I don't have a strong sense for the purpose of this stone.  Black's A group is alive and healthy (so your stone is not an attack), and your B group is alive, but this stone doesn't really connect to it or K3.  Given that both your groups and black's are healthy, I'd make a move on the top.  Perhaps C for some influence.
M: Here black has kindly turned your F6 stone into something useful!
M: I don't think this is a big move --- both groups involved are alive.  I would focus on the top instead.
D: Better to atari at F8 to take sente (see variation to see what I mean)?  M: I didn't see a variation, so I'll try it myself.  (I'm assuming you mean G8.)    Note that you are forming the marked empty triangle, which is traditionally bad shape.  I would still move on the top.
M: Again, when touched, touch back.  I would prefer A or B to this (and probably B).
M: Okay, you have two issues here with the two groups of marked stones.  Note that the squares can't run to the right because of your stones at J3 and K3.  If they run to the left, they run into your living group.  So there's not much chance for them to live, unless J3 and K3 die.  So, to protect J3 and K3, kill the top group with A.  Another way to look at this is that you have two cutting groups (J3/K3 and J6) and A protects them both.
M: Note that A is still doable.  Black's ladder breaker does not help.
D: Hoped to make better at the right side.  M: I'm not sure what you mean by this comment.  Ignoring the bottom, this is a good move in an important area.  I might pull back to A, but I prefer stronger connections between my stones.
M: Note that A is still playable here.  You don't kill the stones , but do a great job of sealing off the H2 group.
M: Good!  This is bigger than A and gives you the potential for a powerful double wing.
M: Don't be afraid to make black crawl here (see variation).  Sure, you lose a few points on the edge, but the wall you build up is worth at least twice those points.  Moreover, moving at A gives you stronger connections.
M: Now defend at O18 (defense first!).   Otherwise you lose the stone and all of black's stones are connected and probably alive.  The variations show how you can then kill the L18 stones or move out to safety.
M: I don't follow the intent of this move.  Q16 already protects the marked cut.  If you are trying to get more side/corner territory, I'd go with A.  You can also run out with B.
D: This move seems premature looking back.  M: Agreed --- I see no need for this.  I think all groups are safe (except the marked stones, which are of questionable importance given they're next to a live group).  I've marked some big areas.  Of these, I think something around B is most important.  If you don't move there, black can create a huge territory on the top left.  After that, you need to invade or make a reduction of the lower right corner.
M: Not a necessary move (especially given the marked wall) although you do get aji for the M17 and L16 stones.  At this point to have some impact on the upper left, you need to take some chances either around A or the region about B --- the O15 stone helps some in sealing off that area.
M: While this is a strong move (you're gaining around 12 points), you are also giving up most of the top (which is much bigger).
M: The variation shows some possibilities in the lower right, but it's very difficult to take much from black here.  The second variation shows a forcing invasion on the top.  These are merely speculation --- playing successfully here is very difficult for me.
D: Bad exchange?  M: Overall, yes.  You've solidifed area that was probably yours, while black now has a much stronger claim on the lower right corner.  I've tried to make some suggestions earlier on options.
M: Very small -- your group is alive.  Again, you want to try probes in the lower right or top.  Next comment is on move 146.
sunsearch [?]: u should declare ur real ranking!!
drafonis [19k]: This is the rank KGS gave me.
sagator [10k?]: j2  M: Do you realize that the K2 stones are dead (thus the J2 comment from your opponent)?
M: I understand the instinct here --- you see a possible weakness and try and exploit.  Here, you don't have many possibilities due to the thickness of black nearby.  Moreover, there are good potential reduction moves, but when you are this far behind, you need something larger.  You'd like to take these instincts and use them earlier when areas aren't as settled.  That's my last comment on this game.  You are definitely doing the right thing in asking for reviews --- that's a great way to get better.  I would also focus on the following:  1) Try to locate "large moves" on the board --- wide areas of interest to both players --- and avoid playing close to your own settled groups.  2) When touched, touch back.  3) Think about cutting stones and how to protect them.  As I said before, I'd be happy to answer questions at mschlat@gmail.com.  You can also find me as mschlat at either KGS or dragongoserver.net.
excellent [2d]: bonne partie
Donal: I went over the game, and my feeling is that the main problem is the fuseki. I want to comment on a lot of the moves, including ones where I would play a different move, but yours was not all that bad. There are also fuseki moves where I am sure that there was a better move.  First, when Black comes in at 5, he is playing an aggressive move. He could have played at A instead, allowing White to play at B. This plan of "staying on your own side of the board" takes advantage of Black having the first move, and if both players keep on like this Black will have a bigger framework that White will be forced to invade.  By contrast, black 5 rushes to keep White from making a shimari there, at the expense of leaving A unplayed. This Black strategy is basically more "risky" as he is giving up the natural framework building move and leraving himself open to attack on the left.. As White, I would always play some sort of pincer on the left side, because it keeps Black on the defensive and is a great extension from white 2.
Now, I can also imagine a pro playing at white 6, but this is not because it is bigger than White A, but because it is sente and he is testing Black's response. Before he decides on the perfect move on the left side, he might want to play 6 and then see whether Black answers at for example B or C. He would then probably return to the left side really soon.  If the information gained from playing White 6 would be useful, then it is a sophisticated move, but if it isn't really going to help you to know Black's response, then by all means play at A, which is where the action is at the moment.
When Black answers at 7, as White I don't know how to play. I would like to defend my own stone by playing A, and if Black plays B, I can play at C, which would be great, but if Black plays on the left side, I don't have a good next move. I can of course play B, but it's not as if I can kill Black's stones there.  So it's not clear that the exchange of 6 for 7 helped. Playing at C instead of 6 would have been much simpler.
White 6 was not a big loss, as Black answered it, but white 8 seems strange. First, the move at A is more urgent, but even viewed locally, it doesn't seem quite right.  First, suppose that Black answers at B and White extends at C, which is probably what White expected. If White 2 was at D, this would be a nice position. Black will not want to play kakari at E because of White's strong stones on the right. With white 2 on the star point however, the 3-3 point can be invaded. White doesn't get enough out of the 4 stones he played on the upper side.  Also, in this game, the threat of White playing at B is small, so Black can ignore White 8. Why small? If Black had already enclosed the right side with stones at the marked locations, white B would be large, because White could next play at E and ruin the territory that Black had played all those moves to get. But in the actual game, there is no territory there yet for Black to lose.
By playing 8, White allows Black to get 9 first, which a really nice move. It defends Black from attack and works well with his stoves across the board.
Finally White 10 is WAY too slow. In this position, White was already safe, as 10 and A were miai. Also, you might have been planning to attack Black next at B, but White has invested so many moves by now that Black can give these two stones up. I think it is safe to say that 10 is the losing move.
Black is pulling ahead with 11, which works well with his stones on the lower left.
White 12 may look reasonable, but it has two problems. One, in combination with White's stones on the right, it is over concentrated. Two, even after playing all these moves, White's upper left corner can be invaded at the 3-3 point. This shape is just no good.  White need to do something else here,  to avoid these problems. One idea is to play at A instead of 12. You eventually had to invade the left side anyway, so it would be easier to do it now. Black might play at 12, but it would work out all right for you.  I personally would play at B. This defends the corner territory and threatens Black's territory. Black might play on the upper side, but note this very important point: moves on the upper side are small, because White is already very strong on the upper right. Both players will try to avoid playing there. White B is the natural way to use the unusual strength of the white stones on the upper right.
Playing at 14 is the obvious move, but it does seem to play in to Black's hands. I recommend playing at A instead. It's hard for Black to completely kill the stone in the lower left corner with one move. Playing at A is a gentle attack on the two Black stones, and Black doesn't know how to handle that. If you attacked at B, he would just counter pinch and give the two stones up. But there's no good way to do that with such a distant attack.
Black 19 looks rather nice, but actually would be better at A. White is so strong on the upper side that Black is not threatening anything. And if White plays at A first, these Black stones could eventually come under attack.
White 20 is a difficult way to play compared with A. Naturally Black will pinch. Because of the strong White stone at 18, the value of Black B would be small, and the value of a White double kakari at B is also small. Especially when Black has played the extra move at 19, A is the focal point of the left side.
This is joseki, but as you know it leaves a cut at the end where Black can attack. It's not such a good idea with Black's center influence.
White 32 looks natural, but when you have the extra move at 10 White is so strong already that it is not urgent. Other ideas for moves:  1) A would defend the corner, and aim at various moves on the left.  2) B would defend the weak center group, and begin to erase Black's framework.
Black 32 is pretty severe, thanks to Black 19. Having played 32, White would have to answer Black A with White B.
White 38 is natural, but the weak White stones in the center could be a big problem. Playing at A would be safer.
Both players are playing pretty well in the corner.  Instead of white 42, A is also possible, but it's much more difficult (see diagram).
Black 47 is pretty good, but it would be even better to attack White with a move around A.
I think this move might be a mistake cause it seems to me i did well until then : black A is too far away from B and C, and the exchange black D for white E is good for white due to the presence of white's group on the left side.  Donal: I think the game is already very difficult to win. Note these points:  1) White 48 doesn't really make territory, because Black can attach at F. And even if you played G instead of 48, the 3-3- point is still open to invasion.  2) Even if you invade at H, Black can simply play at I. Even if you connect, you will still lose.  3) With the unsettled White group in the center, Black can get lots of free moves while attacking it, even if he doesn't kill it.  The best move I can think of is J, which defends the corner and threatens the left side a little. Black might play at 48, but this would become a target for attack, and you might come out ahead in the fighting.
After this move it seems i'm behind quite a lot.
Normally, you should block at A instead of 52, to defend your own territory. Otherwise, why play 48?
At 56, White might have had a chance to attack. (See diagram.)
White is playing inconsistently here. If the idea of 48 was to take territory, he should not have blocked at 52. And if the idea of 52 was to attack Black on the left, he should not have wasted time with 56, 58, and 60.
With 61, Black has made an almost-alive group of 5 stones, making an invasion more difficult.
This kind of invasion should be avoided except as a last resort. The White center stones could die, and black 63 is threatening the corner. This became a problem later in the game when Black played at A.
My first impression here is that either these white stones or the ones in the center will likely die. Somehow in the actual game that didn't happen.
71 is strange. Black A is the vital point.
Black 73 doesn't do much either except to repair the damage from 72.
Here i wanted to connect my two groups but it may not be a good idea because black is too strong after that.  Donal: Black has been split into two and is under attack. This shouldn't have happened.
Instead of white 80, why not attack at A? Even if you can't kill Black, you'll get free moves while attacking.
Black 81 probably won't help get a good attack in the center, so it should be avoided. White has bad aji on the upper side. How would White answer Black A?
Black 83 doesn't do much. White can still profitably attack at A. Black would like to play B, but his upper group might die.
I suppose Black plans to tenuki if White plays A, but he is awfully thin. Black A instead of 81 would have been better.
After white 94, Black can play A, which threatens a connection to the outside and to live in the corner. So instead of 94, White should play B, then C.
Since playing at A would be ko, Black 95 is simpler since Black is already winning.
Having to play an extra move in response to 95 is unbearable. The game is over.  As I said at the beginning, the main problem was the fuseki.  To review the main points:  1) White 10 violates the principle of "Playing Away from Strength". It is adding another stone to a group that is already alive.  2) White 12 also violates that principle. White has become so strong on the upper right that a black stone played nearby can be completely ignored. Therefore, neither player wants to play on the upper side at all.  3) White 14 solidifies Black, making an invasion on the left side difficult. Playing on the right side is biggest right now.  3) Black 19 violates the principle of playing away from strength, too. It should be on the right side.  4) White 20 should be a wariuchi. The kakari doesn't work well with Black's strength around the board and White's strong stone at 18.  5) White 32 also plays too close to strength.  (end of Donal's comments)
I dont know if is better to play here or q10 or if its the same.  csh: It's not the same. Q10 is more of a reduction. Generally, if there is not enough space to expand on either side, then you would play a move like Q10 to create a light group that can reduce Black's territory, but still run away. See the variation.  Since there is room to make a two-space expansion on either side, R10 is a better move. The group will have a stable base and be harder to attack.
csh: Note that this is a bad move for Black. It strengthens the white group. See the variation.
csh: White ends up with a stable shape.
csh: One thing to think about is possibly a different joseki here. Playing the attach-and-extend joseki solidifies the black group, making it harder to attack later. It also ends in gote. See the variation.
f17 seem too small. I also was thinking on k3.  csh: F17 (or F16) does seem small, but protecting the cut is bigger than it looks. The bigger moyo (framework) that you try to create ends up being useless if Black pushes through and cuts.  K3 is also a big move.   One thing to note is that K14 and K17 do not relate together well. It's hard to connect the two stones together with one move, so you may end up playing an "extra" move later to fix weaknesses. In this aspect, K15 works better with K17.
csh: This move was bad for Black. It actually forces White to fix some weaknesses.
csh: White's corner group is now stable.
He´s in my territory and so I try not to touch him and let him make sabaki. I think is better to attack from the outside.  csh: Yes, I agree. It's also important to help the marked cutting stones.
csh: This move looks too passive.
csh: Might be better to extend.
csh: Right direction, but the wedge can be a problem.
This for example is a big move, and I dont feel like letting it for the future, but I let him save his weak group, and maybe I take more profit attacking.  I think is better to play like I did because if he defend his group I can play another big move, and still his group will not be safe
Not necesary I think  csh: See variation.
I prepare a future attack and make territory. I think this is better than just attack
I think this is a big mistake. But if I win the ko I win the match. How high level players do to calculate the number of threats? Because I cant tell now if d1 is a good move or not
This is a mistake but I prefered to let open the posibility of killing the big group letting this four stones alive and with some influence to the right  I think my mistake has been to be contradictory: first I want the corner,and after I want to attack
csh: Wrong side. Drive him toward your strength. See the variation.
Its possible to live here?
If I were black I wouldnt have play so inside, but he take a lot of profit of this move.  Maybe R9 is the best response, or p11 but I see them very pasive
csh: Only a 1/2 point ko.
csh: ?
samma [3k]: I am in tokyo
a bit unusual in the opening maybe? -- Black is experimenting.  This opening seems playable for black although I would play Q7 at R6 personally.  I think black is concentrating more on learning than on winning.
-- Jump also seems okay here
Joseki says black to play D13, instead b tenuki. -- Tenuki is okay - black played this sequence to get a wall towards R15 and this move helps with that.  I personally would have chosen a shimari in the upper right over O3, but this seems fine too.
Is this a good move or should I have played in the bottom right corner? -- I would have played O4.
-- You can also ignore this, Q4 is very hard to kill even if black adds another stone.  Having said that, I'd have played R3 too
I considered also E12. Which is better, D12 or E12? -- E12 makes better use of E16
-- approaching R15 directly would be my preferred option - this seems to allow black to enclose R15 corner and force white towards the relatively strong E17
-- Perhaps too direct by black but the right idea
-- I would play L16 at Q17
-- I would probably tenuki here - this group feels alive but unpromising for expanding.  I guess it depends how promising you think your attack is on E17
-- Too blunt
-- mistake
I think G15 was a mistake. I solidify black. See variaton with F17. -- yes
L13 seems better then J12 -- yes, probably
-- black very happy to get N16 in sente
-- no, see variation
-- exploiting K3 is more urgent.  In many ways this is the move that cost you the game.  I'll expand on this a bit.  These moves are all good locally, building a moyo towards D4/C6.  However globally black has just one weakness (F3) and a dangerously large upper right/right.  These weaknesses cannot be left even if there are really big moves like F10.
-- now white in big trouble
-- correct shape, but too slow given black's strong position
-- black feels safe now, the game is extremely hard for whte
It seems tought to invade/reduce black -- yes, very
-- mistake
-- I dislike this move.  If black S7 then black fixes aji in exchange for a few points and white's not close enough for such exchanges.  If black doesn't S7 then white risks more.
-- game feels over now.  O2 pretty slack too, consider N12 instead
-- I am fairly sure that with correct play this will die
-- no real need
-- mistake
-- another mistake
-- I think black must O8 first
--  Is this really necessary?
I think M6 was redunandt. It is seki as it was - or is it? -- Right, seems seki
Not clear to me how to answer black reduction. How about leaning attack, F4 first? -- F4 will be ignored, directly seems best
-- This move doesn't fit with F7
I better have --  no refutation now
-- missed tesuji
-- you  have to stay careful :)
Black leads in the end
In this game, I felt, I played a very strong fuseki, but somehow it all fell apart.  A lot of my games resemble this, where I will have large areas mapped out, but somehow they always fall apart in the end.... thus without further ado.
here I've chosen a joseki that'll work nicely with my stone there...
J: I think it's better to play at Q7. See the variation
This gives me the perfect excuse to make an extension, and pincer at the same time....  J: Yes. White should finish the joseki with O3 first.
oopsie [11k]: how do i set game up?  im new to site.  J: Allthough a litte far from the R6 stones this is a good dual purpose move.
pooishness [14k]: oh, you hit custom game. oopsie [11k]: oh..havent tried that.  thks
I am aware of the weakness there, but I was betting he wouldn't be aggressive, and would secure life by taking the corner instead...  J: If white plays R9 now it would lead to a crazy fight. But one that's better for black then white.
pooishness [14k]: water's boiling... pooishness [14k]: I'll brb.
ok... this extension here instead of  my weakness at the circle. again, I was betting he won't attack the circle, and i wanted to make sure there are no more attacks on the top side.  As for shape, I wasn't sure whether i should've been closer to my triangle stones, or if I should've slapped down k-16 instead...  J: K17 is perfectly allright. L17 or K16 would also have been good.
J: This move isn't so good. It leaves an obvious weakness at P4. P3 is much better. See the variations.
Here I see a white moyo building.  I understand that my wall is still weak here , but I figure the earlier I attack the better.  J: Don't confuse invading with attacking. If you invade you'll get attacked rather then do the attacking most of the time.   Allthough it might make you feel in controll of the game usually you'll be on the defensive.
J: The invasion point is a bit odd. The points marked with a triangle are more natural.  Whenever you think about invading, you should also consider reducing as an alternative. For example at the points marked with a cross.  Personally I think that whites framework isn't so big and still very open. I wouldn't invade or reduce yet. The points marked with circles also look good.
Here... i had no idea what to do next. I tried reading out the consequences of attaching at k-4, then finally gave up, settling instead for a pseudo peep... my line of reasoning is, if I can make the g-3 group live, I would be building a nice little wall opposite d-3, thus negating whatever influence it's got...  J: Pushing along the J collumn would build a "wall" but not a strong one. It wouldn't have very much effect against the white corner. Instead white builds a wall facing your weakness at P4.   White should play E3 here. It secures the corner just as much and puts a little bit more pressure on black.
I saw that coming....  J: Did you also read out the continuation you played out?
J: So white got a lot of points but black got sente.   The point you now played is an excellent point locally. But let's look at the gobal position.  Blacks group in the lower left is not very strong. It's not that weak either so playing elsewhere is ok.   However white has ignored E5. Now you could first get some good sente moves against the white corner at D5 and C6. This helps your group in sente so you can then come back and play P12.
J: White is trying to make two eyes locally but this let's black seal white in. That's never a good result. White should move out here. For instance at O14.
J: Good. Seal white in.
J: If you want to defend your group then J6 is the point. Black and white are engaged in a pushing battle there. Getting ahead is very important in pushing battles. A white hane at J6 is very powerfull.
normally I'd like E-16 better for shape, but I somehow read this out, and it seemed ok...  J: F16 leaves the corner rather open but it aims towards the center. Which is not a bad idea considering your strength on the top and right.
J: This move does absolutly nothing. It does not make territory, it does not attack black, it does not build a white moyo and it doesn't do a good job at reducing black's moyo either.  So let's take a look at the board position.  Right now white has a lot of solid territory in the bottom right, bottom left and top right.   Black doesn't have much definite territory yet only the right side is really solid. But black has a lot of potential at the top and center.   Black also has a weak group in the bottom left. That's exactly where white should play. He needs to attack black there, build up power in the center and then use that power to invades black moyo.  See the variation.
J: I would consider defending the lower left group here.
J: White is trying to attack blacks group in order to make territory on the left. The idea behind this is good. But the left side is really isn't very appealling for white because black can come in at B14. Instead white should start from J6 which is an important shape pont.
this i thoroughly misread....  J: I don't understand this move. You're picking a fight where you're weak and white is strong. That's not a good idea. Over the next three moves you actually create two weak groups where you only had one.  Moving out to the center should be your first priority. J7 looks like a good place to start running.
I don't know if this was early, but I was reminded of a shusaku game where he plays tengen, and it's awesomeness was the fact that it checked influence, and helped stones...  here, I knew these stones were and trouble, and i was hoping that at a later time, tengen would help them... the way i read it, I veer left, and he keeps me separated from the square stones, I vear right and eventually bump into tengen...  plus it helps every other stone I've got on the center... this felt really awesome..  J: You have two weak groups now playing away will most likely result in one of them dying.   However if you think you can get enough points by sacrificing them then it's fine. But it's a risky strategy.
J: This is way to defensive. See the variation. White should start from J6. This will most likely result in either the lower group dying or it managing to move out very weak. But in that case the group on the left will die.
J: Good.
I was surprised he didn't know what I was upto, and kept on eating my stones... I decided to cut as much influence he's got into the center....... starting with k-6  J: White should really play around K6.
J: Excellent move. It helps your lower left group and expands your moyo at the same time.
another free move.. now I cut another potential area...  J: White is playing on a much to small scale.
Here I'm thinking, I'm soo far ahead.... there is no way I can lose.... the circle stones I'm aware do not have a base, but I can find them a home later on...  J: Good move again.   The circled stones definatly have a base though. The entire right side is their "base". If white invades you should be able to kill it.
pooishness [14k]: sorry, completely forgot about the coffee
oopsie [11k]: no prob..can i have some too?
that stone makes me very happy.  it assures me those stones are living. I think this attack is very deep and kinda silly.  J: White's invasion is way too deep.
this ponuki also makes me happy. now I have a really really strong formation.
pooishness [14k]: hehe,
pooishness [14k]: you won't like it. pooishness [14k]: it's the korean version. which means lots of sugar, and not enough coffee oopsie [11k]: oohh  too sweet
oopsie [11k]: any cream? pooishness [14k]: well, they normally come in premade packets with the cream and sugar inside. pooishness [14k]: kinda makes me miss good old american drip coffee
I again, like this ponuki in the center. at this point, I'm aware that I have a live wire of white stones invading ... my job at this point is to keep it away from those triangle stones.
I expected P 13 and read out the fact that my p14 stone is safe.  with o-13, I read out the sequence again, and thought, it should be safe.. what I didn't read, is the fact that leaving it as is means there will be a live wire of stones coming from r-15 as follows.
J: This is a big mistake. The stone at P14 isn't important enough to save. Play O12 and cut white.
here I start getting nervous, again, reading out as much variations as I can. I'm also very aware that my P12 stones are kinda vulnerable... but I think controlling the live wire is more important... in the process, of attacking that stone, I was hoping to build a wall...  J: White got sente and is close to connecting. This isn't good for black at all.
critical mistake here... I was thinking O-11 is floating, and was happy to give it some life... that and by connecting it, I block the live wire away from the O8 area...  J: You need to save those four stones.
here... i know everything's lost. so I thought, leave those stones as ko threat, and just do damage control....
I know that stone is in trouble, but after losing a big group, 1 I didn't want to get pushed around anymore, and point wise, attacking this area seems a whole lot bigger....  J: The triangled stone isn't important. It's doing nothing so it's not worth saving it.
I tried reading L-14 and remember seeing a bad outcome... you may wanna look at this and tell me which approach is best...  J: It doesn't look like you could gain anything around that area.
ok... this I think is very lame. this should be punished. and I am sure, there is no life here, with a 3-4 stone in place.  J: This is the disadvantage of playing F16. The corner is a lot more open then you think.   This doesn't mean that invading is a good idea though.
J: A strange move. See the variation.
J: Again see the variation.
J: C18 would have made the most territory.
whoops...  J: D19 would have gotten you four stones in gote. You can't kill anymore. See the variation.
now I'm really mad at myself... I see a weakness at E13 and decide to set myself up for an attack on it. if I can cut these stones, I can kinda win.  J: This is exactly why white shouldn't invade. I do think that B15 covers the weakness just enough.
this got pretty delicate. again, my aim here is to cut the circle stones....  J: A very dangerous move by white. C13 is much safer. See the variation.
I wanted D-11 badly... and was debating whether i should just go for it... however, if he takes, he has eyes, and cutting them is kinda pointless.
plan B was to just attack those stones. but I'll be behind in liberties so I'm thinking, discretely add liberties to my group, then attack... so I pretended to try to connect....
which defeated the point of cutting this group because now, they're all connected. nevertheless, I'm still behind, so I add an extra stone.
pooishness [14k]:  whoops.  still behind.
oopsie [11k]: sorrty pooishness [14k]: it's ok... oopsie [11k]: watch ur time..running low pooishness [14k]: warned you it'd be a long game. pooishness [14k]: :)
here I read a ko is the best I can hope for, unless white makes a mistake. oopsie [11k]: not aprob..
J: White should play B13. See the variation.
actually I was hoping he'd ignore this.. point wise, it seemed a lot better.
here I'm looking for good ko threats, but nothing larger than what I have to lose is coming up. the circled points was all I saw.. and while c2 looked the best, it was in the end, not large enough, especially after c3. dissatisfied, I thought I'd just take the second best... which was.....  J: C2 isn't a good ko threath. D1 threathens the same. But it doesn't lose any points.  I think your biggest ko threaths start with L4.
here.. I knew he wasn't gonna respond. this was a really bad ko threat.  J: See the variation.
oopsie [11k]: all yours
score estimator has white ahead by 10 pts.  this was bad.  it means I have to take sente for the end game, and keep it for the rest of the game...
pooishness [14k]: have you ever heard of the monkey jump before? oopsie [11k]: ya pooishness [14k]: shit. pooishness [14k]: :) oopsie [11k]: sworry pooishness [14k]: I can't lose sente. pooishness [14k]: I'm behind by about 4. oopsie [11k]: very close game
pooishness [14k]: I knew you wouldn't take that ko threat. pooishness [14k]: losing sente now is really bad .
pooishness [14k]: arrrgh, took out my tewari. pooishness [14k]: SE has you ahead by 9. oopsie [11k]: i dont know what tewari means pooishness [14k]: t-13 connection oopsie [11k]: time is really short now. pooishness [14k]: when you connect stones like that to the bottom. pooishness [14k]: I know.
oopsie [11k]: oh ok
J: This is a 2 point mistake. Now white T4 is sente. If you just connect at S6 then T3 will be sente for black.
oopsie [11k]: SD
oopsie [11k]: donyt lose on time
J: This is a mistake by white. White should play L2. See the variation for the next black move.
out of time, so I just dropped what i thought was a ko threat...  J: It is a ko threat of course. It threathens to play Q4. Playing Q4 is better though because it threathens the same but doesn't lose a point. I would play L16 myself.
crap. I kick myself... I read this cut earlier, but before r18... now I'm totally gone.  J: You can still salvage something with O18. In fact since white ignored R3 you can make it a very close game. See the (long) variation.
Here I resign...  so the question is, which area should I work on, and how do I improve my game?  and what exactly is my strength???  Thanks ahead of time for reviewing this, I would like to make shodan before december....   thx Joe  oopsie [11k]: thks  gg pooishness [14k]: good game. oopsie [11k]: u played better than i expected oopsie [11k]: especailly with no handi pooishness [14k]: I'm a little stronger than 14k. oopsie [11k]: i do think SO pooishness [14k]: the only reason i;'m here is I'm very prone to making very stupid errors. oopsie [11k]: more like 12k pooishness [14k]: I missed a tesuji on d-19 oopsie [11k]: well, its a game of who makes the least errors oopsie [11k]: yes!! oopsie [11k]: i was scared of that one pooishness [14k]: yea. miss read that one. oopsie [11k]: you also had ko threat , ithink pooishness [14k]: I knew those stupid life and death problems were there for a reason. oopsie [11k]: at o2 oopsie [11k]: lol pooishness [14k]: show. oopsie [11k]: i have to go work now... oopsie [11k]: sorry. oopsie [11k]: next time? pooishness [14k]: oh, that's ok. pooishness [14k]: thanks for the game. pooishness [14k]: sure. oopsie [11k]: ur welcome..thiks oopsie [11k]: cya
J: My overall advice would be to learn which stones are important and which stones are not.  Over the course of the game you had a weak group in the lower left but neglected to defend it several times in order to take big points. A defensive move at the right time can be a lot bigger then you think because it prevents an attack.  On the other hand you worried about unimportant stones quite a bit. P14 and K13 for instance aswell as D7 in the fight in the lower left.  I would also recommend to study a lot of tsumego. In particular tesuji problems. The book Tesuji by James Davies is excellent for someone of your skill.   You asked what exactly your strength is. I can't possibly give you an exact answer based on just one game. You played a pretty close even game against an 11k so if his rating is any good I would put you at about 12-13 kyu. Just let the rating system figure it out in due time.  I hope this review was helpfull.
cksmao [1d]: hi
Donal: Black 3 seems strange because both black stones are on the third line on the right, making a position that is too low.
It's not clear what Black is trying to do here. There is a possibility that Black could later connect at A, but that is too low so Black needs to avoid doing that. And if he doesn't connect, he has two unconnected groups without eyes. The easiest play here is at B, making C and D miai. See the diagram for another way.  In any case, it's vital for Black to avoid letting his two stones get hemmed in.
White 10 is OK, but A is simpler.
Attaching at black 11 doesn't make enough space for eyes, and so is probably not a good idea. This is just strengthening White.
Black 19 is fine, but 21 should have been at A. Black will get locked in.
Normally, if Black has to play a move like this to survive, we can expect him to lose the game.
I think i ended up well on the left but I'm not sure about this move. What I did after as well I wasn't sure about.  Donal: It seems pretty good to me. It doesn't leave Black with a good extension in that direction, and it doesn't leave him an invasion either.
If Black can get White to answer at A, this is a reasonable kikashi. But White can fight back.
Capping play seemed most appropiate.  Donal: This works surprisingly well. My first reaction would have been to just answer at A since the white stones on the right are weak. But..
The exchange of 35 for 36 seems to be good for White. So in retrospect, Black 29 was probably an overplay.
Black is going to get hemmed in again. This isn't good, and he needs to break this habit.
Connecting at 46 is slack. This doesn't make good use of all the stones that White has played. Instead, he should play A. (see diagram.)
This was bad I think I tried to scare him into making life in gote somehow. =/  Donal: It's a nice thick move and tempting to play, but he can ignore it.
Black 49 is really big. If White had played there he would have had an easy game.
No hurry to play 50 and 52. These can be used as ko threats
Black 55 is too low. Next White can play at A, forcing Black B. Then he can play C, making a big center framework.
Probably something higher would of been much better.
This seemed really stupid of me =/.  Donal: You need to find some way to build the center.
Black 71 could be omitted. There are much bigger moves.
Black 75 is going to be attacked heavily. Black A is better. If white B, then black C for example.
Black 79 should be at A. Black is letting himself get locked in too easily. Several times he played moves that let White wall him in: at Black 21, 37, 41, 55 and 79.
This turned out really well for me.
White 84 should be at A. Then if Black plays B, then white C. This is a standard technique. Of course, the actual game was not bad.
At this point if White plays at A, Black could get into trouble.
White 118 is good.
But since Black played at 119, White should play next at A. This makes a big difference.
White 124 should just be at A. 124 isn't as good as it looks because Black can throw in at B. (Explained in more detail later)
Mistake xD.
White 32 is no good. (See diagram.)  Donal: White played a good game, basically. White 48 was too slow, and gave Black a chance to recover. White 58 was in the wrong direction, as White should have been trying to build the center.  Throughout the game, Black was playing too low. Several times he got locked in unnecessarily. Black needs to give higher priority to maintaining a path to the center.  End of Donal's comments.
cksmao [1d]: thx dN21death [2d]: oops dN21death [2d]: 4got dN21death [2d]: thanks
stephand [3k]: I have the feeling that it was not the right joseki to play. Black is very strong on the back and created the moyo but what Joseki should I have played? stephand [3k]: The moyo black created was on the top because he attack my white group  TM: Je ne vois aucun problème avec ce joseki. (En fait, c'est noir qui a été peut-être trop ambitieux en jouant O4 au lieu de O3.) Tu pourrais jouer ailleurs, ou bien renforcer maintenant et ensuite viser soit le coin vers O17, soit le bas à J3. Il faut aussi que tu te rappelles que c'est une partie avec handicap donc bien sûr au début ton adversaire va avoir l'initiative. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- I don't see any problem with this joseki. (In fact, I'd say it was black who made an overplay at O4 instead of playing O3.) You could play elsewhere, or defend your position now, aiming at the top-right corner near O17 or the bottom side at J3 next.
stephand [3k]: I felt this move was necessary in order to avoid black to play here and build a very strong position on the bottom  TM: Ça marche. Tu pourrais aussi considérer jouer à J3 pour t'éloigner un peu du coin à droite. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- This works. You could also consider playing at J3 so that you're not so close to the bottom-right corner.
stephand [3k]: but, after black played R13, could I leave this unanswered? What should have been the answer at this stage instead of K3?
stephand [3k]: I played here instead of S7 because I felt I had to play closer to R11 that was too isolated. Am I completely wrong?  TM: Ah non! En jouant S9 tu donnes une cible à noir, tandis que c'est toi qui devrait monter à l'attaque. Des coups sur la deuxième ligne qui s'attachent à une pierre de l'adversaire signalent souvent une stratégie spéciale, par exemple pour essayer de créer un groupe vivant chez l'ennemi. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Oh no! Here you're providing black with a target, but you should be the one going on the attack. Playing on the second line next to an enemy stone usually indicates a special strategy, for example when trying to live inside enemy territory.
stephand [3k]: What should have been the best white move here? Obviously black is not killable (we tried many variations with nieldaniel) so instead of trying to kill it what should I had played?  TM: Vu que noir t'a laissé connecter tes groupes, le coup à P6 n'est pas très crédible comme menace. Je crois que tu peux tuer son groupe. Mais si tu ne vois pas le coup de grace pendant la partie, ça serait peut-être mieux de renforcer ta position tout en lui laissant la charge de trouver une façon de vivre. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Considering that black let you connect your groups, P6 isn't a very credible threat. I think you can kill his group here. But if you don't see the kill during the game, it might be better to strengthen your position while leaving it up to him to find life.
TM: Comme résultat de ton attaque féroce, tu finis par avoir un point de coupe. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- You end up with a cutting point as a result of your aggressive attack.
stephand [3k]: White is very weak at this stage, isn't it?  TM: La position est devenue un peu compliquée. Noir et blanc tous les deux doivent faire attention. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- The position has become a bit complicated. Black and white must both be careful.
stephand [3k]: Even weaker now?  TM: En effet. Tu as poursuivi noir avec tant de détermination que tu as oublié l'existence du reste de la planche ! ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Indeed. You've been attacking black so determinedly that you've forgotten that the rest of the board exists!
TM: La position de noir dans ce coin est assez forte. Ça serait mieux de ne pas continuer avec ton attaque. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Black is quite strong in this corner. It would be better not to continue attacking it.
stephand [3k]: Q18 is a mistake, I should have played S18
TM: Hm? ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Hm?
TM: Noir aurait pu prendre l'initiative à ce moment ; la stratégie de blanc a été un échec.  Je te recommande (i) de jouer d'une façon plus calme, (ii) de trouver une stratégie globale (garde toujours une vue d'ensemble) et (iii) d'essayer de conserver le sente plus souvent.  Fin de commentaire (mais voir variation). ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Black could have taken the initiative here; white's strategy failed.  I recommend that you (i) play more calmly, (ii) adopt a whole-board strategy (look at the big picture), and (iii) to try to keep sente more often.  End of comments (but see variation).
stephand [3k]: N14 was a stupid move, although I saw during the game O12 I tried to bluff nieldaniel hoping that because he didn't see it, he wouldn' see it anymore
stephand [3k]: obviously I was wrong
nieldaniel [6k]: nice two kills from you nieldaniel [6k]: way to get back after that top right corner
stephand [4k]: you need to try when fighting with handicaps nieldaniel [6k]: yup
nieldaniel [6k]: I was not careful, letting myself tricked into that ko nieldaniel [6k]: )-:
nieldaniel [6k]: with a threat that was no threat (-: stephand [4k]: yes - ko is very difficult nieldaniel [6k]: I should have let you some small profit
nieldaniel [6k]: and win comfortably... possibly stephand [4k]: yes
nieldaniel [6k]: too bad nieldaniel [6k]: so I learn nieldaniel [6k]: (and how happy I was for the fight in the top right and for chasing you in the middle :-) stephand [4k]: yes nieldaniel [6k]: while making profit in the bottom left and on the top stephand [4k]: i made a mistake up left and was a little too arrogant with my bluff
keladry [13k?]: gogogo  Pierredego : This is an unusual approach move.
Pierredego: ...And a fine answer.
P : This contact is very bad.
P: It is indeed a good idea to cut.
P: White doing very fine until now.
Was this a good point to move elsewhere?
P: This is OK but see variation.
Better get out. See variation.
Avoid contact moves while attacking. The diagonal move is considered a contact move. It will make the Q17 stone stronger. R15 would be better.
This black move was rather useless
This is a good move but I would have played m16 first.
This is queer. M16 is better for black too.
Same comment. (M16, even more urgent now.)  "Play urgent moves before big moves" -- Go proverb
This is too tight for black. Something like M3 seems to me to be better.
This is also a contact to be avoided. It makes it too easy for black to cut while strengthening himself.
Not good
L6 better, in order to take advantage of the white stone at O6. See var.
I think around this time I was thinking about sacrificing the bottom and trying to maintain the right and top.  Should I have played it out differently before this, or should I be thinking about it differently around here?  Pierredego : There seems to be no need to sacrifice the lower side. The aji of O6 enables you to run out. However you might want to play M16 first. Then, if black closes the lower side with M6 you might still be able to resist there... (See variation)
This allows a good shape for black (lets him hane you). Consider the variation...
This was really bad for black. The move serves no purpose.
Good. You've seized the opportunity.
This is not very big however, as compared to some other points. M16 still is rather urgent. Might you be fearing black Q4? See variation.
This also seems very small.
This is big.
It is much more urgent to prevent the san-san invasion on the upper left. One play at either c16 or d17 prevents this.
Indeed, there was a weakness there.
yeah this thing was pretty bad :(
Good but C4 is urgent now.
Terribly useless black move, and bad shape to boot.
I prefer C13
Avoid contacts. This is the same mistake you made earlier on the lower right. G17 is better. F16 allows black to push you around and gain strength in the process. Always attack from a distance. All you need is restrict the space for two eyes.
Black is kind to you, playing such bad shapes.
Good
One has to wonder why black didn't make an eye through playing at g13 instead.
this shape confused me a bit -  sort of double ladder-ish?  Pierredego: See variation on next move...
Formal [15k]: wow, what is this - double ladder?! ;)  Pierredego: Yes, complicated position.
keladry [13k?]: sweet
I'm not so sure about how this would work if he didn't miss the atari  Pierredego: It wouldn't, I don't think so.
Maybe should have played to the right of 184 instead  Pierredego: True.
Was this necessary?  When I think about it later it seems like I didn't need to play 190  Pierredego: I don't think it is. P1 and, of course, C4 are the important move now.
Pierredego: Not really needed.
akim120 [17k]: nice one akim120 [17k]: should have looked at that mroe closely akim120 [17k]: :(
M >  This is  not a bad move,  but you should take into account you are giving your opponent a large move around K16.  This will work very well with his chinese opening.  For a chinese opening, (as well as san-ren-sei), the area around K16 is crucial.
M >  This feels a bit slow. You are playing on one side of the board, while black is developing rapidly.
M >  Now it can be seen that black develops quickly, and keeps initiative. All the white stones are on the left side, while black's covers almost the whole board. This opening is a success for black.
M >  Good move, you make a base for your group.
Misread/Bad Move
M >  This is too early, and it is unclear what you want to accomplish with this move. You will only make black stronger.  I would propose playing q15, or r15. That area is crucial now - when black plays there,  invasion will be difficult for you.
M >  You are just crawling, and not attacking anything. You are only making black more solid, and not getting anything in return. You are playing dame-points, while the opening isn't even over yet !!  You already made black's group around q4 very solid, giving him points in the corner -- all for free.  Your group is fine for now,  you should tenuki.
M >  Ka-ching ! Mega amount of points for black. And he all got it because you provoked him to take it.  This is terrible for white.  All your moves were saying: "Please, dear black, make your corner solid and take lots of points,... I will just play all these dame-points and get nothing in return"
M >  Not necessary for black -- both of you should be playing around q15 now.
M >  Not necessary, black should play around q15.
M >  You want to attack the n7 group ? It will be very hard to catch it -- it can easily run. And when you don't catch it, what have you gained by this move?
M >  Look, your move p7 just provoked black even more to take points and make his groups solid. You gave him dozens of points again.  What is more important -- you cannot invade on the right anymore. Black is solid now.  You shouldn't make the groups of your opponent strong when you don't gain anything in return.
M >  The same applies to this jump, and the next one.
I didn't see the cut comming at all.  Is there a way to connect here?  --  M >   This whole problem arises because you added all of the stones n4, o4, p5 etc. to your group. Now when M3 gets cut off, it is painful, whereas earlier, you could've just given up that stone.  Before N4, you should have left this position and played elsewhere on the board.  L3 is a very good move by black,. However, white can connect by playing L2.
Uh, you should read ahead before playing each move :]
M >  You should have played this immediately, instead of n4. Try to keep an eye out for the large points on the board. When it is not necessary to play locally, just play the large point on the board.
Here I surveyed the game, and I pretty much figured that if that group died, I lose the game, so I decided to connect and fight it out.   M >   Yes,  it looks hard now for white. However, you *have to* give up the stones at p11, p9 etc. (I assume this is the group you wanted to save ?) If you try to desperately connect, you are only inviting disaster. I know it's hard, but it's essential to *let go * of stones which cannot serve any purpose.  Blakc can happily let you connect, -- and in the meantime, he will grab truckloads of points, and easily win the game.   You should try to attack and kill something of black, to compensate for the losses you hvae suffered in the lower right corner.
M >  This doesn't connect. Remeber that the keima shape (the "horse-jump" shape, q13, r15) is cuttable. (That's why the proverb says: don't run with a keima).
Here, again, I felt I could ditch the 3 stones, but I decided to fight  M >  You can only fight when you have a weak group of your opponent to attack. Here, black is solid all around, so you have little chance of gaining anything in the attack.  The whole idea of linking up these stones is misguided.
Here again I felt I could ditch the stones and attack instead, but decided against it.
M >  You have given black 40 points on the right. What did you get in return ? Sure, you have linked up your stones, and gotten out into the center. But where are your points? Black can just let you live, in the center, invade on the left and win the game.
M >  This way, black grabs points on top, while you have to worry about making eyes.
M >  Good move.
M >  Don't run with the keima shape ! A keima is cuttable!
M >  Bit too far for black. he should cut you immediately (see variation).
M >  Good move !   Black should have continued to attack your group.
M >  This is not a very good move.  You should continue running, around H15.  This move doesn't do anything.
M >  This is painful now. You have to worry about the life of your group.
M >  Very strange. Why have you played J15 and L15? What are these moves doing for you?  They better do something, because they gave black the whole top side (about 40 pts) !  Usually J 15 is played when you want to cut at H 16, but here that would be bad, because black is alive on both sides (K16 group and F 10 group.)
M >  Nice way of using the aji of h16
Right now I feel like I'm already losing by quite a bit.  M >  Yes,  you should play a couple moves more, and then resign. Black has the whole right side, plus an enourmous corner. You have only potential territory at the left, and it can be invaded easily by black (D 8 is a very painful point).  Moreover, your center group is in critical condition, and can be attacked by black (for instance, L 10 makes k11 a false eye).
M >  Good idea of attacking D14 !  If you can kill it, you may still have a chance. However, you really have to worry about the eyes of your group in the center.  But this is not the right move, unfortunately, you should play E 13. Your stones don't have many lberties.
M >  Ouch !  This is why F 13 was bad.
M >  Nice, you still got a lot of points on the left.
M >  Bad move by black.   Peeps usually are to give teh opponent bad shape, but here it's nonsense,. becase white is already alive.  You should ignore this and play D8. It is much bigger.
M >  Bad move by black. Use this opportunity to play D or E 8.
M >  Overplay. However, you're far behind in points, so you have to try something.  It's very hard to live here.
M >  The white group is dead.
M >  You end in gote with this. You should play D 8.
What's the right move here?   M >   Good move by black. You either connect and let black live on the side (not an option for you, because you cannot afford to lose much points (you're beind by about 20), or you take one side and let black reduce you.  This is however also not an option for you.
M >  This is one of the possibilities of taking one side.  It's good that you didn;t try to connect at all costs !
M >  This doesn't seem to work.
M >  I didn't expect this move :]
M >  It even turned out ok for you :]
M >  ?? Bad move by black.
M >  This is desperation... :] you cannot live there.
I realized this was a really, really stupid idea.  Then again, I was already losing, so unless I got some points back it really didn't matter.  M >  Yes.. :]  However, you cannot gain much from this ko (you only capture B1)
M >  Ok, the game is really over now. You should resign. Continuing to play is very rude towards your opponent.
M >  Ouch ! Black should just connect at C1 , and your group is dead.
Thank you for your review!   M >  This was a fun game to review.  It's obvious that all of your problems in this game were created by the move N 4 and the sequence of moves you played after that. You played only on dame-points, while making your opponent stronger.  Try not to give your opponent a good reason to make his groups solid. Keep them thin and weak, so you can attack later.  When you play a move, make sure that is *does * something for you. All of your stones at N4, Q7 , -- the whole group on the right, which became such a big problem --  did not serve any purpose. It did not surround any territory, and it did not attack any groups of black (black was solid on the right, and capturing the center was not reasonable).  You made the common mistake of starting to fight much too early.  N4  was a strange move. Perhaps you thought you could split or attack black. But it was much too early for that, since the opening was not over yet. Fights are for the middle-game. A good rule of thumb is to play in the largest open area of the board in the opening, and to have your stones all over the board.  At some points you made obvious reading errors. Try to stay focused during play, and read at least 3-4 moves ahead. Doing a lot of go-problems may help you with this.  My nick on KGS and on Oro is "ignus". Feel free to ask me anything about this review, if something is not clear, or if you have questions. You can also just ask for a game, I'm often willing to help out :]  You can also of course send me an email.  Cheers !  Ignus
p16 is good but what is your strategy? A move like this treats a moyo and forces white to imvade and have an object to attack timing is critical in a game like this. It is a difficult choice fro black but it is a very valid move
This is very poor play by white. Helps Black to strength his position and set the moyo
Should I pinch here?  this timid play makes white big mistake into a good play
Very good for black
This move is not joseki, but when I start this joseki, my opponents usually play this move (because it seems natural).  How to handle this well?
excelent play by black
Should I play this move or protect the cut at Q8?  So far black is playing good
I should jump to R10 instead of this move  Yes
Let the stones die
Or Q13?
Take sente here. A, B and C are the critical point to seal white so take profit and keep the pressure on white at the same time.
Bad move I guess. Good but maybe a litle patience at this point be better.
play elsewhere
Should I approach from one of the marked? or this is ok?  c5 is good
I think white should pinch here, right?
better to play in one of the corners
the corner is better
My opponent peep after this move. I feel that I can handle the peep, but I don't know how. Could you help me?  black is ok but a little on the defensive
I misread here.
Lucky got to play here. I think white mistake here give me many points.
FM: The sansan invasion is the most common play now, but is also what black wants when he plays sanrensei. This is surely also playable as well as the B or C move.
FM: according to some book theory, this move is not good
FM: A is much more common and faster way.
FM: This shape is obviously much better for white than in the variation.
FM: black should have played at A instead
FM: White needs to stop black like in the variation. Like this the white corner territory is still too opened and the influence has still some weaknesses.
FM: this game will be hard for white now.
how to play here ? i decided to defend my weakness but it seems a bit easy on black group
FM: Slow move and unfortunately black can still reduce the corner a lot in the future.
FM: very big.
now black group is completly settled, nullifying the effect of my wall, and the invasion at A is still possible  FM: yes, the result is good for black.
FM: I would definitely play A now, black is leading and there is no need to provoke any fighting.
FM: correct side. The E3 have would make white too overconcentrated.
FM: White is worried about the K2 connection, but this makes things easy for black.
is the result good for black or white ? I prefer black here because both sides got a weak group but black group has better eye shape. On the other hand something round A is still possible  FM: As you said, both sides are weak now and must watch their steps carefully. I think black last move was a bit dame and gived white the upper hand in the area. But the fight is sitll not over...
FM: if white doesnt kill or cut black into parts, A is better.
FM: not so good peep, the marked stone becomes suddenly very weak.
FM: good shape move.
o3 better ?  FM: O3 looks really tempting and better
FM: Black manages to turn his weak stone into an attacking one.
FM: black gets too territorial here, but that hurts his marked stone.
i'm very happy here  FM: yes, white shape is good and black is low
FM: This move looks like dame. Probably it's looking to kill white, but anyway A is the point of absolute importance now.
FM: If black had already a stone at A, his position would be much stronger
FM: very sharp move. It requires a lot of reading before playing this way as black will have many cutting poitns soon.
FM: Similar situation as in the lower left corner, solid connecting is almost always better. But in this position it doesn't matter much - the shape white gets with this move is excellent.
FM: black has too many weaknesses now.
FM: Connecting like this and letting white A and B peeps is very painful, but necessary now
FM: another painful move. Black result on the right side was a disaster.
FM: White should play the A and B peeps as soon as possible
FM: good reading, but the squeeze is good for black.
FM: strange move, capturing at A was very natural.
i guess i should have cut at p10, my m6 group is not so weak  FM: turning back like this is good for black - if you didn't see other answer to the blacks last move you should not play the peep at all.
The marked exchange was very good for black, the black stone hurts white eyes shape and makes some extra points.
FM: hard to decide how to protect, this is probably ok.
FM: the vital point of the shape
FM: very big move
FM: very small move
at this moment of the game, i thought i was ahead  FM: the centre was a big succes for white - if you look seven moves behind the thing that happened looks like a small miracle. If next the A-B-C-D-E-F combination would be played, I think black is still in the lead, though only small.
FM: very risky way of playing, if black dies here, he cannot win anymore.
game over
white is behind and it is impossible for him to catch black  FM: Yes. Losing this game only by 3,5 points sets you to be the endgame master :) I hope you enjoyed my comments and wish you many enjoyed games  Martin
lkyfkc [1k]: thanks
SakataEio [1k]: no pb
SakataEio [1k]: thank you very much
Strange direction
Usually Black plays at A or B
The result is comfortable for W
Nowadays this plan is popular
The most simple answer. It's more active for W to block at A
Locally the result is slightly better for B
Quite slow. Kakari around A would be faster
Is it necessary to defend here? I would prefer to make the shimari around A. Also, if Black wants to defend - he must play at B, taking more points -
Correct
Though out of joseki, it felt like this was slightly better. Do you agree, or is there a reason why this isn't a joseki?  Breakfast: It's not a joseki, because the lower atari is painful -
Not the best answer -
Honte?  Breakfast: Yes, the only move.  This result is good for B
I suggest to push at A and check White's response
Do you need a wall here?
Usually B connects at A, but I agree that the wall on the right is useless -
Atari at A is very nice
Usually B extends at D12
I'm relatively inexperienced with oki; was this, and my following move, reasonable moves?  Breakfast: Good shape here. I like it
Too aggressive. If you want to attack - start from D6
W has lot of other good options, because Black's shape is thin
Looks like an overplay. I would prefer to attack at A first
It helps W -
Also helps W -
Rude
Now B is very weak in the center
Also rude. We call such shape "pushing toothpaste" -
I realized after the game that this was a horrible trade because I created a weakness in my group for nothing.  Breakfast: Yes. You have poor shapes now
At this point, I was drastically low on time.  The move I played wasn't great, but I hoped I could get my time back and then find a sequencethat works. As is obvious, I didn't. I included a variation that might've worked, please critique it or show me a better variation if possible.
B is in trouble now
At this point, I was drastic.  I didn't think there was a way to kill it, but once again I was low on time. I read through several sequences, so I think I'm right ion saying it was alive.  Breakfast: W is 200% alive here
No more chances for B in this game. You created extremely weak shapes in the center and W punished you well
I probably should know this joseki, but was A honte? It felt like white could have invaded here or at B and then created at least a ko.  Breakfast: Your answer in the real game is best
Well, even though this game is short, thanks so much for reviewing it! I hope reviewing it helps you :)  Breakfast: You are welcome!
PM:  White's move here seemed wide to me.  Instinctively I wanted to play the point I marked with a trangle, but played "A" instead.
W plays an overplay here. You have to punish it.
big mistake here
ouch
too passive.
here you make your upper group weaker: almost dead already
PM:  At this point i figured my group on the top was sunk.  Very hard game for B now :-(
PM:  Better way to handle this?
PM:  I forgot the monkey jump doesn't work because of the cut at "A"  Indeed
Hmm. Now the game is over. W has only strong group and secure points and is more than 40 pts ahead.
PM:  Stronger kyus always pull this on me.  I felt like I should have played "A" but whenever I do that I get cut at "B"
PM:  Sneaky..could I have avoided this?
ouch
you have to respond with s2
PM:  I couldn't see a way to make life after this, so I treated it lightly.  White threw some more stones in there, I used the opprotunity to play elsewhere, but the fact that white kept attacking it makes me think I could have lived.  You can make a ko. :-)
PM:  Totally misread this
Watilla [?]: hi Watilla [?]: gl
kube59 [21k?]: Hi, have a nice game !
Watilla [?]: 10x
Zander: This move is too far from the marked stone to use it effectively for support.  Black will be able to build a strong position while White tries to live in the corner.
Zander: In the game this works out for White, but if Black plays a little looser, it's very hard to live with these stones.  White doesn't have eye space nearby, so will have to run a long way to safety. I think it's better for White to make a larger play elsewhere and come back here only when necessary or as a ko threat.
Zander: This does not seem to be a common play for this joseki. I think it generally works out well for Black, with White ending up with inefficient shape.
Zander: Black's play is too narrow.
Zander: Black is overextended. There's a good chance to cut at G15, I think.
Zander: In the variation this cut doesn't work because of the liberty at K15.
Zander: F12 instead makes a safe connection for Black.
Zander:  White needs to be concerned about saving the stones at J12. White seems to have an advantage on territory already, so it's probably not necessary to kill the group at G13 to win. I think it's better for White to save his stones first, then continue to apply pressure as a secondary concern.
Zander: Again, in the game this works out for White, but there isn't really room for White to make eyes with these stones.  White needs to kill something to live, so Black should play loosely with a mind to securing the surrounding groups.  Usually the group at K9 will be dead. I think White should play elsewhere to try to claim as much of the territory in the lower left as is still available, and use these stones for their aji (to threaten the black groups from the other side) and for ko threats.
kube59 [21k?]: I know I'm dead ;-)
kube59 [21k?]: I can give up if you prefer
IcedEarth [20k]: h6 Ð¼Ð°ÑÑ Ð¸Ð²Ð¾. Ð¾Ð½ ÑÐ»Ð¸Ð¿Ð¾Ð¹)
Watilla [?]: lol
Zander: From here to the end it's the same as my previous comment.  If Black focusses on securing his own groups instead of attacking, there's not room for White to live.  By this point White has committed to this line of play, but against a stronger opponent would do better to pressure black from the other side to secure territory in the lower left and on the edges.  This ends my comments, I hope they are of some help.
IcedEarth [20k]: ÑÑ ÑÐµÐ¹Ð¼)
AthensOhio [2k]: hi, have a good game! MicaelS [1k?]: thanks, you too
dv: There is a problem with this move. It is not a big mistake, but big enough to matter at the high dan level. Black loses the option of invading the corner and commits himself to capturing the White stone. The move has a "heavy" flavour.
dv: White should just play 3-3
dv: Now it is White who suffers, compared to the joseki. For reference, in one of the joseki, WHite has all the triangle poitns and Black the squares. Black is closed into the corner, White has influence outside. Here, White is separated and Black has the corner. Black is better.
dv: I think Black chose the wrong joseki here, because A now tries to develop from a low position.
dv: Exchanging 1 for B first is probably better. See variation.
dv: We can see that Black has taken three corners, one corner is open (I would defintitely take it, being Black) and White doesn't really make an overwhelming moyo in the centre. The white 2-space extensions are too meagre and Black's squared 1-space-jump is shining brightly.
dv: very likely this is a good time to invade.  This kind of decision needs A LOT of consideration. You have to think how the game might progress, not just "we'll destroy that potential territory and we'll see what happens after"  1) Do I want to live (triangles) in exchange for a strong White wall? 2) Do I want to run at the letter points, while White runs at the circled points.
dv: the crosscut is dangerous
dv: It is dangerous for White to push Black over the weakened stones. Are you prepared to sacrifice them?
Apparently not ...
dv: So Black now happily continues his attack.
dv: Unfortunately, Black now loses focus. It is the triangeled group which should be harassed, not the squared one. The group A cuts weak from relatively weak. Group B cuts relatively weak from strong !!! So it is cut A which need persistence, not B.
dv: Suddenly, Black's important cutting group comes under attack.
MicaelS [1k?]: would you care for review?
AthensOhio [2k]: sure! AthensOhio [2k]: but the game's not yet over :) MicaelS [1k?]: no AthensOhio [2k]: but yes, review is a great way to get stronger. let's make time for it
dv: Again, White pushes Black over his weak group. He might be interested in defending himself instead, at A or B. In such running fights, if all groups are into open space, it is difficult to attack them. Any direct attack might help the opponent.
dv: I think Black now concentrates on reaching the other side. I understand that, but I think it is better to concentrate on cutting of White's weak group.   In our minds we must think about the drawn result. White's triangled groups connect, Black's squared group too. Is this what we want?  See variation.
dv: Must be the other cut. See var.
MicaelS [1k?]: I atari wrong way AthensOhio [2k]: we'll see AthensOhio [2k]: B still has problems  dv: Yes the atari was wrong. See var.
MicaelS [1k?]: sure
dv: good sacrifice
... and Black has accomplished little. Again, I understand reaching the other side seemed to be good when conceived.  dv: White now definitely has the better position.
Good.
dv: simply A
MicaelS [1k?]: ... haha forgot about that  dv: I hadn't seen it either. Nice calculating.
dv: A gives more eyespace
dv: there is no cut, due to lack of liberties.
dv: This is small. Black has many options for this group (A & B), so no fears. C is big now.
AthensOhio [2k]: thanks, misclick MicaelS [1k?]: np AthensOhio [2k]: you are a courteous player
dv: must capture
dv: Black loses a move
dv: the wrong attack: play away from strength: A
dv: ok
dv: big
dv: A kills now
dv: Now the White group is dead.
MicaelS [1k?]: your turn
MicaelS [1k?]: :)=
MicaelS [1k?]: omg I am dead there MicaelS [1k?]: thx AthensOhio [2k]: many thanks AthensOhio [2k]: let's review
SK: The pincer at 4  is a really severe move, after this pincer there is only 1 good continuation to keep the spirit.
H: Should I have jumped out at R9 instead here?  SK: The problem here came after the move at A (Move6) wich allows W to flatten the right side and attack to your pincer stone.
SK: This doesnt seem the most propper move for W. W should use the wall he just build to attack the marked stone.
SK: W has lost a lot after Bk3. He needs to try something bigger than f17.
SK: I'm sorry but this doesnt seems to be the best move. Right now I think that the jump to A is vital. Another big move is B, maybe C to develop your lower area.  On variation A you can see what I think about  your question on move 42
SK: This move seems soft to me. I would play A. The variation will explain :)
f3 does allow the connection with A. But the corner is open to an invasion. That's why I like e3 more.
SK: Sorry but I think A is better shape. Keeps attacking to W.
SK: This is bad direction of play. W should push B to face his wall.
H: This development felt slow.  Is there a better way to develop this area?   SK: Well... In the variation at move 20 I think B was nice. But here it's pretty hard to choose a move. I would probably play A  maybe some kikashi first.
SK: This isn't so good. There are too much weakness.
SK: This move is too soon. W is weak at the center.
SK: This is an overplay.
Allowing the monkey jump here hurt.  I think M2 instead of N5 would have been better at 76  SK: Yes this destroys your base. B is in serious troubles now.
SK: This is a dangerous exchange! it weakens the group at the left... This is not the propper timing.
SK: Right now this move may seem big. But your group is pretty weak, you should strenght it so you can try to attack to A and B. Remember that these long extentions (K17) have wekaness at a lot of points.
SK: W misses to attack the A group
SK: This is gote for W... B May play somewhere else. A is not the same anymore but  maybe an idea to help the group on m2. B  is really big. Or B may probe with C before A.
SK: This weakness is too big.
SK: I dont really like this move. I don't understand the idea...
SK: A is important for B... On handicap, and even games, you must not let your opponent to surround you.You must fight for the center.
SK: if you eat you've sente
H: Too slow?  Perhaps play at N17 to develop top side?  SK: It's pretty hard to say. B seems able to live after a tenuki. you may escape to the center but L10 will die. The exchange seems good enought to me (See variation) Annyways I would play  this move. W attack on the upper area doesn't seem strong enought to me.
SK: This move shouln't work. B has nothing to worry about.
Sk: This cut is too soon.
SK: I think that black lost the game here. Before this move B seems to have maybe even 15 points of advantage
SK: B could kill..
SK: :( This move is gote...
H: Missing this cut definitely was bad  Sk: Well.. The real problem was on the upper area. This ko isn't so big. W was already ahead.
Hi! I'm putting my conclusions at the start, rather than at the end.  First of all, re-reading this review, it sounds very negative. Don't worry, you played very well indeed, with very few serious mistakes. It was an interesting game to review.  Secondly, it's a bit detailed. Normally I try to focus reviews on one or two points, but this is the first time I've reviewed for a strong SDK, so I've just added everything I could think of. I hope you don't mind!  Overall, you lost because you didn't fight hard enough. Like you say, you lost by the sum of white's small gains. You should work on appreciating the value of weak and strong groups: not just ones that might die immediately, but long-term strength that affects strategy rather than tactics.   I hope this is useful. If you have any questions or anything, find me on KGS (I play as "sixsix"). Enjoy!
This is good direction, killing the influence of E15, but almost any move is good this early.
I've put variations for black's next move here. They are all just ideas, most of which you probably considered yourself.
This three-space extension leaves a weakness at the marked point (C12), and you should really have a plan for dealing with this. See the variations uses of the three-space extension.
This is a good move by w; now you have no good move to fix C12. When you play a three-space extension (or any other shape), you should be aware of its weakness and have a plan for dealing with it.
too deep?  Definitely. You seem scared of letting w have any points at all, but you are just giving him targets to attack. You now have two worries in the top left, and still haven't answered O3, while w has only one group to worry about in the top left.
There are a couple of variations on the next two b moves, just for interest.
You are abandoning the fight! If w plays D17 now, he is guaranteed a good result
This is the only move in the game that is an outright mistake. I assume it was just a silly misread.
white looks really overconcentrated.  black feels happy.  would you be happy if you were black?  Definitely not. White is certainly inefficient, but that has to be compared to black's position: two stones captured, two on the second line, and a further two stuck uselessly to white's unkillable group, with the C12 invasion point still not fixed.  Most importantly, though, w has a strong group out into the center. The best use for handicap stones (and influence in general) is for attack, and that means keeping your opponent cut, weak, and sealed in. There's a variation earlier in which b gives w a big, sealed-in corner, which is worth comparing with this position. Bear in mind that we not even twenty moves in, so investing for the future is an important idea.
Good direction again. A (E13) and B (M3) are also good.
yes, it's not joseki, but is it fair, given the black position in the top right?  Not really. See the variation on this move.
Last chance to save the honour of Q4 stones by cutting at Q3
R11 is good, but the Q4 stones are now useless so you have effectively lost two moves.More importantly, you still haven't given w any weak groups.  White has two very strong positions. Black's positions, while impressive-looking, are full of holes and weaknesses.  In particular, you say you were trying to give white what he wants while building strong positions. Maybe this is what you were thinking of, in which case you need to reconsider the relative strength of R8 and R11. A two-space extension is strong enough in the opening, but they are only two stones, and later in the game they will be very thin. On the other hand, white's corner will never ever be weak. Therefore w certainly comes off better here.
too close?  A little, yes, but it's justifiable because it aims at P2
This is not a good move by w. Those two stones are useless, so attacking them is a waste of time.
White is far too intent on taking two stones.
yose move, right?  Yes, O6 to seal w in is better
Not bad, but I would also consider N6
Far too deep. W is aiming at attacking the M3 group, because he knows an attack is more powerful than a straight invasion, but b can handle this
Dubious. Deciding whether to pincer or cap is often hard, but here K5 is definitely better. See variation
maybe J2 better?  W's last two moves are played to prevent b connecting underneath with K2 so the attack on M3 can continue. This move is good, J2 only gives w more forcing moves.
Now it's clear that b should have played K5 instead of a pincer
Good!
k2 better?  K2 leads to trouble - see variation. Your move is better.
Well played - b has no weak groups and w still lacks definite eyes, floating in b's moyo.
white wants a ko...black doesnt want trouble, so...?  ...so black just gives in and lets white have exactly what he wants? You have to fight this ko, it's huge and also hugely favourable for black. Black takes first and also has a nice ko threat at O6 - what it there to be afraid of?
ok?  No! Terrible! :D  You have to appreciate how important it is to keep your opponent weak and yourself strong. Now white can use H4 as support for a strong invasion of the left side, which is looking rather thin. Furthermore, black's link to the right side has all sorts of weaknesses which white can exploit later in the game. Compare this with the position where b fought the ko.
how to handle this?  In the fight that follows, you tend to play in the wrong direction, missing chances to make your stones work together. It's always worth bearing in mind the two iron rules of fighting:  - Connect your stones (and cut your opponent) - Move out to the center (and seal in your opponent)  I've given lots of variations to look at, bearing these in mind. Hopefully they'll give you idea to think about.
See variation
This is painful for b
ok?
This move is trying too hard. It tries to defend the side and connect to H7, but doesn't do either properly.
b4 better?  No, this is good.
This feels very bad indeed. You are pushing white through your territory, gaining very little. Players of all levels make this mistake, in varying degrees of subtlety. The most obvious example is watching beginners, who try to block invasions by playing contact moves; their opponent just pushes right past. It's sometimes called "squeezing out toothpaste".  Here, you cannot connect underneath w, so pick one side and deal with it properly.
nice combo by white, which black hadnt seen coming.  suggestion?  - Backing down from the (extremely favourable) ko let w settle himself and create a weak b group which is now causing trouble.  - R10 instead of Q8 was the wrong direction, letting w use the strength of his corner and cut the centre group. - Letting white turn at N10 was huge and changed the whole feel of the game, with w controlling the centre. - E7 was just not effective. - D7 and C7 were very bad style. - Black has missed his chance to cut at K10 and coutnerattack.  These mistakes, none of them too bad, all come together to leave b in this position. Black escapes very nicely, but it costs a lot of points on the left.
white gets his capture, but black is still ahead on territory, ...or is he?  the wite stones in the middle arent connected to the side yet, but how can black exploit their aji?  Notice that the C12 weakness created right at the start has made a difference! White also has D14 tesuji to capture even more stones.
Not a good defensive move, missing all the key points. White has a huge capture on the left, but it's very hard to get something for nothing and now w's centre group is in serious danger. It should die.
wrong?  Yes, white will probably die in the centre, or at least lose a lot of stones, if b attacks strongly.
A vital point, but w might still die.
what's better? m13 i suppose...
Should be G18
necessary, right?  Yes.
mistake?
An unfortunate misread.
I have no idea why you play this move, or why w answers it, when S17 is just waiting to be taken.
Last chance - see variation.
This is huge.
It feels weird leaving both sides for black to attack from his corners (around A and B). See variation for common Fuseki ( opening)
Tom: This is a weird extension. Usually B would play around here to make a shimari
So far your play has aimed at territory. So did black's moves. This is aiming at getting influence in the center. I would prefer a shimari (A) or an approach at B.  B looks good because it prevents black from getting a lot of influence at the bottom
i would have played at A, preventing him from getting settled
i don't think the sequence is over on the top, your K16 stone is alone.
This is not joseki. See var.
Good direction of play here. Trying to attack the two stones on the top leftis a good idea, but youi have to be aware of your lonely stone at K16. I would have played around C13 to see black's answer, and after that i would have played C10 See var.
Black has started to get a moyo on the lower left (triangles). Maybe you could play around H3 to prevent it from becoming territory.
If you want to get a moyo, triangled stones make it hard to turn it into territory. I would play around one of your lonely stones (squared).  If you look at the goban, black seems to be ahead, mostly because of the lower left corner. He also has the lower right corner, but you have the top left, and top right corner. Since it will be hard to make territory in the center - because of the triangled stones, maybe you should focus on getting territory on the right where you have the best chance to do so.
good thing you got to play it.
I think this is the "i-let-you-live" move
You should play somewhere else.
This has few chances to become an eye, you should try to thraten the group, and at the same time pressuring the bottom right group
You destroyed your own territory, and gave black a huge one.
useless
Oups^^
He played chinese fuseki as white, so I used the fact I was black to try to build on a larger scale.  ---
When I play chinese fuseki, I like when the opponent plays the D/C 15 invasion, as I profit enormously. So, I decide to invade where I have a little more room, at C6. What else are some possibilities for me to do?  ---
I was trying to build up strength so that I could later invade his top right some.  ---  Top left is what I think you mean. Also this move leaves a lot of weakness and oppurtunity to cut.
here it is hard for black to find a good move.
this tesuji doesn't work here
I wasn't sure what to do here, as C16 is what I normally see, but he didn't have the F16 stone to  back him up, so I was thinking of reducing the top.  ---
This is a mistake in direction, you want to attack towads your thickness which is D15 (the little you have for this attack)  Also this move leaves E11 which opens up two cuts, so you need to make sure D15 can live.
I saw that this didn't neccessarily work, but that B8 may take away an eye.  ---  this move is like a pass
This seemed unreasonable, what should I do?  ---  The start to your response is fine.
these three stones are not worth the attack on white
I think the T16 hane first is better.  ---
T9 to force the ko instead maybe?  ---
blocking on the other side makes my territory look way too small for the amount of stones I invested, so I thought I could get a better result out of this.  ---
I thought I was close enough to pull this off  ---
this is a mistake
Of course, I'm in atari on top, but I didn't see this.  ---
Thanks for the review.  Maybe if I didn't make that mistake I would of won, but I feel like my games have been lacking good judgement at parts.  ---  You need to just do some more Life and Death problems, if you're reading goes up just a bit, you'd have no problem beating a player of this caliber.
romain: this move always annoying to me, i don't know  how to approach it. but with handicap, i thought best way  to limit it's effect was a very counter-influence move  (which proved wrong later but, whatever...) There's tons of ways to deal with this stone. Most popularly are the komoku (A), the mokuhazushi (B)  the san-san invasion, or the shoulder hit (C).
romain: ok here's my attempt. enclosed easily, i was not  very satisfied I disagree, you got a large corner and werent really  enclosed. His three stones increase in "height" from the bottom to  the top, sothis play was good both because white had to  protect its undebelly, so you got sente, and also, the  top-left corner was white's largest area.
This move is not very good. Generally, it's best to block  from the corner first, then the side, and then finally the  center.
romain: maybe too passive? as it's open on other side?  but it was also to threaten left side invasion. I don't think this was the best move. I would prefer  something like this. (see variation)
Simply A is better.
Perhaps A would be better. With that continuation, you  would gain more influence in the center and on the right  side, with which you could attack white bottom group  more easily.
romain: here i made a mistake i think, kind of "i play  automatic but woops, he did not follow same joseki as i  did..." r16 instead?  This move does seem good, but it lacks the ability to  threaten to seperate white's stone unless she responds.
slow? O15 better? or M16?  I would prefer to escape rather than live in the corner  since its so small. I would reccommend playing A first.  White would respond at or around B, and then black  would responds with C. Now, black has the option of  attacking one of white's groups (starting perhaps with the  marked spots) depending on which group white tries to  save first.
A is absolutely necessary.
i was kind of afraid he could have killed later, so i played  this to be 99% sure of my life (well i admit, i thought 100%  during the game). Was that needed? i just gave him such  a perfect wall ...  This move is not needed, but I can see why you worries -  the tsumego is not the easiest to solve. As for the wall, normally is would be good, but your  marked stone  limits its purpose; he should not let you  have gotten so much for nothing.
Hamete, A captures the stone.
Horribly passive - this move does little. It's very important  to make your tengen stone live. Running with A is optimal.
i think i could still kill this by ko, but was that a good idea?  maybe it is something to keep for later?he'd have so much  threats with , but if i can invade he's moyo enough, maybe  that's worth it?  I think that in this case, black can get a ko, but I prefer  the other variation since black will lose less if he loses this  ko.
Due to these stones, trying to enclose territory with this  move is pointless. it also does not to invade because  white's two groups are close and strong enough be  invaded. I think a more passive A is better as white  cannot fix this gap while making black's shape worse.
that came just too much perfect for him...
this move made me look after why he did play that after  the game, then i found a ko (i may be wrong though),  tryed to show the variation on the move before. well it was  a bit complicated for my reading.  I agree, theko is not very easy to find, but there is one.
Ok, but if you're going to play here, don't be afraid to play  A.
was that needed? i thought i could live but he'd get huge  yose there, but maybe ,not as big as A4? thoose seemed  kind of miai to me, but one must be bigger...  This is why yose can be tricky. Both corners look big, but  not only are they surprisingly small, the bottom is worth  quite a bit more than the top.
I would capture at A first since it is sente.
Only worth 1 point (2 pts total, but it's gote, so 2/2 = 1).
no stupid risks... Haha, I know the feeling, but it's not neccessary.
C: Maybe I should choose o15 here ?
This move is good. R17 is an option, too.
C: I admit I don't know the joseki drom here on. But after it was done I didn't feel to bad.
Yes, that result is not bad for White.
C: I thought this was a nice outcoming because it is still easy to invade R10 or something like this and the M17 stone is also unsettled while i get a big corner.
C: Maybe I should have played F16 at G17, because then I needn't fear h17 and could play C9 now ?  G17 may have been better because of the stone at M17. Anyway, black would have the opportunity to attack C12. So if you are afraid, not to play the pincer might have been better.
C: Is there a other possibility to attack C10 or make the D12 stones stronger ?  I think this is a good move, because it makes Black low and strengthens your group. I don't think you can attack C10 severely without putting your own group in danger.
C: Maybe D8 instead of C8 ?  This move is not possible. D8 is correct.
This is good. S4 spoiled the corner invasion.
Bad move. You are happy to connect.
C: Pusching one more time to prevent the tesuji, which appears later ?  I think pushing one more time or G13 would be good. I guess you didn't want to spoil the cut, but Black H14 will defend the cut anyway.
Just extend to H12 instead.
C: I didn't see a got way to save my stones. That was the reason i sacrificed them.  Yes the stones are captured.
This was not necessary.
C: So I lost my stones, but i was happy that it was possible to make F10 stronger  But i think you lack points now.
C: That looks very bad, but what to do against that ?  This is why Black S3 was huge. You could have played M3 instead of S2, but I don't think you can expect  a much better result after S3.
This is an overplay. The middle group is not really alive.
This doesn't work for White. See variation.
Black can cut at E6
C: That was a fast playing mistake... Should have been at E6
The game is clearly over now.
This is no good.
Should be Q11.
C: I thought it was a nice exchange because there is still aji in the r8 stones  You would have to kill Black's group in order to win. I don't think its possible.
C: I missed this tesuji nad that was the final mistake, but i think i was already behind before because of the big territory at E3.
C: To sum it up, I think my biggest mistakes were C8 and the missing of K12 and K8 tesujis. I should have used my time better at this points but it is difficult to play slow if you're oponnent plays fast.  Thanks a lot for every comment !    C8 was probably the losing move. There were several mistakes which could be avoided by reading just a few moves ahead.
mija [7k]: hi
dan: so far so good
dan i have doubts on this move try to avoid contact in the beginning unless it is for defense see var
no
i do not think this is good
NOOOO
no black move is good now
NO
ok
black too thick
?
avoid contact plays
to be avoided
ok
NO
NO
black left with too many weaknesses and group in corner still not alive!!
awfull for black
not interesting
too much
no
no
no
no need
awfull for black
black helps white to reinforce
??? 2 weak groups to deal with first
???
big mistake
black lucky
no
??
it seems black and white have exchanged their game!!!!!
??
good enough
??
Great idea taking the corner here.
The question you were now asking yourself is: Is my top right corner safe? I understand how scary it is when people seem to be able to magically invade a corner that looks perfectly strong.  You must not let this fear overcome you.  You are stronger than the fear.  Keep your composure and ask which white move(s) might be most damaging.  You might fear white's move at A, separating your two marked stones.  Pause now and try to figure out how you'd respond if white were to invade there.  Then look at the variation.
While having more black stones sometimes makes you stronger, it also sometimes makes you weaker.  This move only makes sense if there was a danger of white separating your two groups.  Often, more important than the number of stones is the amount of space available to make eyes.  Q17 was practically an eye, but by playing Q17, you kind of poked your own eye out, removing lots of possible ways to make two eyes.  I'm not saying that your corner is now weak -- it's still very strong.  But it was already very strong.  This wasted move is one reason you might always be a step behind.  It's your turn to be a step ahead!  Take advantage of the opportunity.  A move near either 'A' might be nice.
What purpose is this move accomplishing?
Now this looks pretty.  Black's only concern is the big white framework that's forming.
Wow!  I'm glad you got this move in.  White's making me uncomfortable my encircling so much.  But if you can do something with R5 (or a similar move like Q6), the marked stones seem like a complete waste of moves.
Good thought.
Trying to stay connected -- good!
Too aggressive.  Look at all your cutting points (marked with X's)!  See the variation for a simpler way white could cut this to shreads.  Instead, of trying to build something from a foundation of sand, you must either abandon the foundation completely or you must solidify it first.  To solidify some, play a move that defends the cut at S3 or S5 instead of playing Q2.  Examples of moves to consider: S3, S5, S2, S6
Nice.  You could even have been more aggressive.
S1?  What a waste of a move.
Good job taking advantage of white's wasted move!
I like this.  This is the kind of nice, simple move that I often overlook.  With one move, you perfectly defend yourself, freeing you up to attack the growing framework with your next move.
YES!
You can't let this go.  Your left side's pretty safe, certainly not urgent.  When you're invading such a large framework, going so deep into his space, such fighting is super-urgent!  Consider extending, since you're already so high (fourth line).  You'll build some eye space while strengthening your stone.
Great move.  I'd have probably not seen this one.  It strengthens your two weak stones by giving them an extra liberty, while also attacking his weak stones.
Cutting is SO important.  His marked stones are under attack.  Don't let them connect to the strong wall!
Reading is good.  He has your three stones in a ladder.  Don't waste a move trying to escape.  Instead, find something that can be saved and try saving it, for example, trying to connect A to B.  Or extend somewhere, like C or D.
Your group has no place to even think of making eyes, and has mostly been cut off from connecting to any of your stronger stones.  You should have tried to connect earlier, or to make space for eyes (for example of how, look at move 60's variations).
This group is now dead.  It has no hope to gain even a single eye, nor can it connect to any of your strong stones.  It is dead.
Wasted move.  It's already alive.
narushi [18k]: End game now? gboggy [17k]: a few moves left
Great!  White has no room to build eyes.  You have crushed him between your strong stones and your strong wall.  White's invasion has been defeated!
Why????
Again, why?  It looks like you're trying to keep white out of the marked space.  Instead, simply keep your stones strong so he doesn't kill them.  See variations.
No.  Atari from the other side.
Now, it is harder (though not impossible) for black to live.
Both B15 and W16 are not joseki, both seem to share tightly the stakes in the upper corner, whereas the idea is to develop the stones all over the board.
good move for w
good answer from black
good idea, but the cutting point remains in A. B43 is a big point, but it is not urgent for white to answer here.
here black is helping white to build a larger moyo with this move.
Was this a playable invation?     I think it is a bit too deep. Maybe B49 at M4 would have ensured a way out to the center.
moves 56 to 62 work excelent for W, because he is building a wall. B 49 needs urgently to build a base
a bit slow, I would have immediately taken attacked n9 with a hane
this shape is very weak against the wall on the right side
was this too far, too close, or just a bad place to start using my wall?           whose wall? do you mean black's wall far away in the upper left corner? B101 is standing alone very bold against white's massive thickness in the lower right side.
well defended, white should have been more cautious and let the two stones be captured.
good defense
because w is so strong now, an invasion is very difficult to stop. It shoud be answered more patiently at c3.
usually, against this peep better connect.
here you got tricked again, otherwise the loss would have been less.
white was lucky here.
R: I don't really like this move because it's influence orientated and D17 is low. It's probably not "wrong" but I would prefer A.
R: This one is strange. What's black's intention? I like to think of P15 as a move to build up influence or a moyo (if black has the upper left corner). Besides: In this situation a high position on the upper side is not desirable because WD17 is low.  R: If I was to pick a joseki I would like this typical one (see variation) most.
Dan: What is a good way to react to this move by White?  R.: This white move is bad (A is joseki). I would simply take the corner (as you suggested - see variation).
R: I think A is still bigger.
R: Still A instead. ;-)
R: I like this one to "punish" black's high position. Besides: The upper right corner is still huge. ;-)
R: Maybe its better to simply split the left side and make a base there (see variation).
Dan: Is this correct?  R: I don't like it but since black's situation is cramped (compare easy splitting variation at move 21) it may be the best choice. I did try some variations but wasn't happy with them either.
R: This result is very painful for black (espacially compared to the splitting move).
R: I think black should help his weak group first. A is safe. B is faster but weaker. At the moment white cannot cut B because he's too weak himself.
Dan: Again, I left the stones in the upper right because I wasn't sure how to play them.  Can you give me some suggestions?  R: I would jump out. After white B16 there is even less to gain at the side.
R: White almost forces black to live now. Profit is uncertain.
R: This was easy for black... now white "wants" to play E7 (else black E8 or D7)... he should have played there in the first place (the move at F5 was to aggressive / an overplay).
R: How many points did this move make? Are you sure that there is nothing bigger on the board?
R: Yeah! Catch the stone! Maybe you can do it! It's late endgame, isn't it? :)
Dan: This must be wrong.  R: Attack the base first (as you suggested).
R: Now white is alive and will probably get both endgame plays... what a pity.
R: How many points is black protecting here?
R: Black doesn't even have to answer this. There are bigger moves (see variations)
R: Why does black answer here? A is bigger, B is bigger, C is bigger...
R: A and B still bigger
R: What's this?
Dan: There must be a better way for black to handle this.  Any help?  R: I didn't find one and I think black's solution is fine (although simply connecting looks less ugly the result is the same).
Dan: Just to see what happens, I tried to play in here.  R: Ok... but there's nothing to gain.
R: Nice game. If you had payed more attetion in the endgame, you could have won easily. :)
This move is dubious.
Since A is so large, B seems a bit off topic.
Experimental style. Solid approach would be A. Settling the corner is very large!
I can see why you felt forced to play here. But A is so large ... you get komi, so maybe it is okay if you both build moyos.
This move is a mistake.
Overplay. you already have a weakish group on the lower side, don't start another one.
Maybe he should have played A instead. But I'm not sure about this.
This worked out great for you. Lower side got a helping hand, and the wall works great with A. The stone at B, in an important place before, is now a "bubblegum" stone, as I like to call them, sticking useless at your wall.
Black is playing too slow. If he likes territory so much, he should have played a shimari opening.
Too small now.
Supersmall.
Now you profit on his being too careful. But A is larger. Your move mostly works, because he answers it.
Sente. Thanks, black! :)
I still prefer A, because it also develops the left side.
He should have taken A.
No! Make the most of your potential! Don't help him live easily and reduce your influence!
Upper side was bigger, as shown in the variations.
A was the shape move.
Now we get to the blind spots I was talking about in the introduction.
No!
Now he has connected his stones.
No!
You helped him to connect and to find a safe way out into the center. The opposite of what you should have done!
Maybe you can try for more.
This helps him get out. A was still better, since your wall up there is in place. Press your opponent's weak stones against your walls!
This only helps black to do what he wanted to do anyway!
The empty triangle. You should be attacking, but instead he forces you into bad shape.
You only helped him to come out.
Solid, but slow.
I'd rather like to surround him at A or B. Surrounding is the most basic attack in go, try to surround a weak group whenever you can! Instead you're holding him the door open.
Out in the center he is.
This move does not improve your position. It is ajikeshi - destruction of your own potential.
Weren't you planning to kill him?
Instead again you help him connect.
This is the end of the review.  The direction of play and the size of moves explained in the opening stage will be easily comprehendable as soon as you see them on the board.  The bigger problem is your attacking technique. Attacking means to cut your opponent, and to surround him. If possible, you kill him, if not possible you at least contain him, forcing him to live small, taking influence for yourself.  In this game you often did the exact opposite: Instead of cutting him you helped him connect, and instead of surrounding him you simply helped him find the way out.  If you want to learn more about the correct way of attacking, get yourself the book "The ABC's of Attack and Defence" by Michael Redmond, 9p. It is a marvellous book, and after you have studied it thoroughly, you will have grasped how to cut and surround properly.
cg: to be expected
cg: this is passive.  i prefer to chase at p12 first, then extend to r9 if needed.
cg: wrong side.  much more potential benefit if you force white to live on the side.  see variation.
cg: see variation
P: This is bad I know  cg: might as well take at r12 first
cg: slow.  at k3 it has a chance of being considered sente, but not at j3.  i like f6 here, or possibly jump in at f10 or so.  not too deep.  territory looks pretty even here.
P: I know that this is not very good But I wanted to assure territory: I see that I can reduce his territory in the centre from several sides  cg: it is already getting difficult to invade the centre
cg: it already looks to me like getting into the center is imperative.  even if you give up the two stones at k3 it may be better for you in the end.  i through in one possible variation.
cg: the last two black moves were extremely slow.
cg: now you MUST get into the centre.  i would probably try k10...threatening to connect back to p9.  k10 can also support you if you try to push through at f5.  see variation for one possibility.
P: Now the centre is too big, and my territory is safe. I dont know well if I should reduce or try to live in the centre. I dont know if was better to sacrifice territory before in the sides to reduce his territory in the centre.
P: I started trying to reduce, but now I think this was not a good idea. Maybe was better to try to live in the centre using the threats of linking with the sides  cg: yes, but too late.  see previous comments.
cg: i put in a couple of long variations.  it looks like you had some chance to live in the center or reduce around L6 a lot.
cg: maybe e6 works now too.  i played a variation for fun.  don't assume it's a good one, but maybe it will give some ideas.
cg: j10 way too slow when trying to live in the centre.  you must play lightly and be willing to lose your tail sometimes.
p: Im trying to make sabaki, but I dont know if Im doing ok
P: I´ve lived. But it was because I had luck? Did I play correctly?  cg: I think you should have died.  see variations at moves 115, 147, and 151.
M: 5-4 spooked me a bit, wasnt sure how to handle it. My choice of approach in this corner might have helped me lose this game.  When one plays 5-4, they are looking for centre influence, but more inclined towards the side it is leaning on (in this case, the right side).  If you're worried about 5-4, i suggest you play your next move at D4. Seeing as your upper-right stone occupies the star point, it's quite stable, so you don't need to go for a parallel double-star opening.  See variation.
M: The pincer is always confusing and usually leads to me losing games. Did I follow up correctly? why or why not?  Jumping out in response to the pincer is typical, but seeing the 5-4 stone in play, this may not be the optimum move. That's not to say it's completely wrong...  D4 is a 4-4 stone, so you could attach it from two directions at once. E6 at F4 looks good. See variation.
XCM: See variation
XCM: Ah, you played here anyway, good.
XCM: See variation
M: Is this a bad way to handle the 5-4? I had never seen it before...  XCM: Much too direct. By playing this deeply, you are letting him enclose you in the corner, and letting him build outside influence. Add that to his stones on the lower left, and that influence is already 50% territroy.  See variation.
M: it seemed bad because w was thick and also had sente. Seems like w has this game already
M: Since w took a big gote, I thought I should too. Is this a big gote to take?  XCM: See Variation  Overall, this is a good area to play, trying to secure the entire upper side.
XCM: Too high. See variation.
XCM: Playing too high presents this problem...
M: I thought I should pressure O17/16 because he abandoned them. In hindsight though, this fight might have benefited white more than black.  XCM: Pressuring is a good idea, however keep in mind that "pressure" does NOT equate to "kill". You just have to chase and chase your opponent, not necessary to kill, just make them small.  See variation.
M: I thought I had a good moyo upper left, but apparently the hole at e14 is disastrous. Should b patch it up now?  XCM: Yes. I would likely G16 or G17 now.
M: now the tables are turned, black is split into weak groups and w enjoys eating his territory
M: I thought I should salvage some territory while pressuring white.  XCM: This one oversight turns the tables. Now white is pressuring you.
XCM: Why do you want to break out here? The corner is safe. Try instead to save the K16 group.
XCM: See variation.
M: so here i read out that if i try to close him off, my stones die, so I abandoned the idea of closing him off to the idea of saving my stones
M: here I thought this was appropriate as it is a medium sized move, and secures my group.
M: Is there a better way to creep into the corner? I thought w should block, and tried to come up with something that would eat into his corner.  XCM: This is pretty good already, but keep in mind white's entire framework.
M: I was happy with this result though.
M: My idea with this move is to help my group of stones, and pressure his. Later, I felt this might be a bad move, because i spent a move protecting a cut. Is there a better way for me to accomplish these goals in this situation?  XCM: I see your intentions, however in this situation your biggest concern is to deal with white's large influence.   In this case you have to tread lightly. L12 is a good start.
XCM: MUCH too slow. Develop lightly and quickly. See variation.
M: here I protect the cut in gote =(  XCM: See variation.
M: protecting another cut with a small move. Am I being too cautious? It seems that when I am not cautious, my opponent punishes me for being greedy.
M: At this point white's moyo is huge. whats the best way to reduce it? i tried pushing in, cutting, but it didn't seem to help much. is there any way at this point?  XCM: At this stage i would say it's a bit late.but there are a few places you can nibble away at his area. But first you muse make life in the centre.
M: now w's moyo is territory =(
M: I misread here. maybe playing too fast.
M: Here I was happy to take many sente moves. I think this is the only reason that the score was so close in the end.
XCM: See variation.
M: i felt this was a place that needed to be dealt with now. Is this the way to deal with it?  XCM: R13 would have sufficed, and left less openings.
XCM: See variation.
M: B getting all the sente moves.
M: I decided this was the biggest gote on the board. Is this right? Any sente moves I missed?  XCM: Here's a tip - keep in mind most of the big endgame are locate on the edges.
M: here my opponent made a big blunder, so I let him undo.
M: I didn't see that this was sente.
comeback [3k]: hi guest69 [4k]: hi gg
guest69 [4k]: have fun
* One note on this move. Black just started one of the most complex joseki ever. Unless you really know what you're doing, i do not recomment this move at all. For any kyu level player, a simple variation gives an equal or better result than starting a huge gamle with C17. It is completely impossible to read this joseki so if any player deviaties, the result is more or less random.
guest69 [-]: Here i forgot the joseki completely  * This white move is not Joseki. It has been played by pros a few times tho.
*This move cannot be good. White A, capturing the stones makes white perfectly healthy and black has huge shape problems.
* Black has bad shape. There is a working cut at A and the B stone is cut off. White has no bad aji in the corner.
* At this point, please note that the A-B exchange was useless for black.
* This fight is probably better for white.
* I think this is a bit off. Since C12 is stable now, black can aim to split the 2 white groups. Black will not kill anything, but he can hope to make his group alive in the process.
* Good move.
* In this game, the center is important, because we're fighting. That's why we dont like the low 3rd line.
* Enclosing black is good for white.
* Good move by white.
* Black is in huge trouble.
* This is a big gift. Now black is alive for sure.
* This is aji keshi. Do not play this exchange.
* This move is impossible.
guest69 [-]: Black is dead, I think. As one can see, the game is lost already. guest69 [-]: Nevertheless, the game ended with Black behind only 7 points. So i think that somehow Black can still win. Please, any endgame moves or vital points that you can see I missed, point me those. Tell me how can I, from this point on, WIN this game! ^____^  * I am not quite sure how white can kill black now.
* Ouch. This is 10 tsumego extra this week for you!
* Black spent all these moves and now he's ignoring? Well, let's call it bad aji for later. But please dont allow white to play moves like A to fix herself in SENTE.
* Very solid by white. Good.
* No. This is wrong. Why is black helping white? D3 is a defensive move, but it is unreasonable in this position.
* Black must defend A.
guest69 [-]: Maybe it is better continue to play on the lower left corner, but White seems alive.
* This move is uncommon, but playable, with R6. On this board maybe good.
* What is this?
* This is gote. Why is black playing here? :(
* This is the correct direction. White feels better.
* This is not that big. Since white is strong in the center, white can just play A or B now and she's ok.
* This is very very very bad. Wrong move locally, and wrong direction.
* This exchange feels good for white. Black has still bad aji around A.
* This is ok.
* This is slow for white.
* Good idea, but this looks like random shape.
* This move does not work. White can easily defend herself while reducing black and the game will be over. But just defending is too slow for black, so this move, hoping for a mistake by white, is probably ok.
*This is the wrong direction!
* Now white is nearly alive. Black lost his moyo. The game is over.
* Ambitious. Nice idea. But white should play solid and win steady.
* Good idea by black.
* I think this is a shape mistake.
* Nice idea.
* This is very bad by white.
* Good.
*Huge success for black. There is still terribly bad aji around white's captured stones, but black can win now. White has bad shape because black can play at A later.
* Good. Now black's group is stronger and white has to think about her corner group more.
* Black is very happy to fix A. Big success. Black is probably ahead now.
* A B (maybe C) miai to reduce. No need to play here for black.
* We can consider thie move a probe. Will black play A or B?
Black's move is not bad, but white is happy about this black move, because later she can play A or B and reduce black a lot.
* B2 is probably slow for white, even though black's B2 is sente.
* Gote is bad.
* This is dame. A white move at A or B is bigger (A does work indirect).
* I will only comment on big mistakes from here on.
* Oh?
* Big mistake.
* Now black has a lot less aji here.
* Big mistake. Not needed. What is white thinking?
* I love to force opponents to play like this. I'm really happy now ^__^
guest69 [4k]: >.<  * Big mistake. Don't play dame.
* Big mistake.
* Big mistake.
* ?
* Good order of moves.
* Big mistake.
< Mishuu : C'est un coup un peu bizarre mais tout à fait possible, vous défendez votre coin. Revenez un coup en arrière pour voir les réponses habituelles à une approche classique telle que F17.
< Mishuu : Que cherchez-vous à faire avec ce coup ? C'est la question qu'il faut toujours se poser avant de jouer, quand on en a le temps. Ici, la pierre triangle est faible devant les deux pierres blanches, il faut donc la stabiliser. Voir variation.
< Mishuu : Bien. Cette pierre donne de l'espace à blanc et menace le groupe noir du haut.
< Mishuu : Noir devrait plutot penser à protéger son groupe du haut, qui est plus menacé.
< Mishuu : Coup inutile, car la coupe n'est pas possible. Voir variation.
< Mishuu : Attention aux menaces de coupe ! La faiblesse en A n'est pas négligeable, il faut connecter.
< Mishuu :  C'est un coup très petit ! Dans ce début de partie, je préconise deux genres de coups possibles :  - un "gros" coup, qui occupe une place importante sur le goban, comme A, B ou C  - un coup "urgent" pour donner de l'air au groupe blanc qui est lourd. (D, E ou F), ou attaquer le groupe noir à gauche ! (G ou H)
< Mishuu : Encore une fois, c'est un petit coup.
< Mishuu : Oui, il faut sortir le groupe blanc. Jouer des coups plus loin est possible aussi. voir variation.
< Mishuu : Inutile. S'étendre simplement sur le bord est suffisant car la pierre blanche ne pourra pas vivre.
< Mishuu : Je me met dans la peau de noir. " Le groupe blanc va vivre. J'ai des groupes très solides à gauche. Il reste de nombreux points importants inoccupés sur le goban. Il faut les prendre !! " voir variations.
< Mishuu :  Cette conection est peu efficace. voir variation.
< Mishuu : la variation que je propose permet de garder une certaine pression sur le groupe noir.
< Mishuu : Inutile de protéger ici.
< Mishuu : Dangereux, il reste 2 faiblesses !
< Mishuu : C'est une erreur!
< Mishuu : Attention aux erreurs comme celle-ci quand même :p
< Mishuu : Bien ! il faut s'étendre et limiter le territoire de noir.
< Mishuu : Voir variation, pour des coups beaucoup plus "gros"
< Mishuu : Ce coup est très lent et inutile... Il faut approcher la zone d'influence de noir, voir variatio.
< Mishuu : Les derniers coups de noirs sont très petit et laissent la possibilité à blanc de s'infliltrer.
< Mishuu : Coup de protection inutile.
Donal: Up to white 4, both players are playing pretty well. Instead of 4, I personally would be more likely to play at A, because opposing 3-4 points are considered to be quite powerful. But this white 4 is OK too.
Black 5 is in the wrong direction. The idea of black 1 and 3 is to build a huge black framework. Black should continue his expansion, and not worry about White's territory, which is smaller. Eventually White, being behind in territory, will be obliged to invade Black's framework, and Black will then be at an advantage in the fighting.  With this black 5, Black is losing sight of his strategy and complicating what should have been an easy game. Don't complicate the game unless you are losing and have no other choice.  White can now pinch at A, which is a great extension from his stone at the left as well as being a powerful attack. (See diagram.)  What should Black should have done? I would suggest B or C.
White declines to attack, and plays a slow territorial game. This is another possible approach, but White will need to stick to his strategy and play mainly territorial moves. Playing passively like this from the beginning, White cannot expect to be able to do any attacking. Instead, he will have to let Black make his framework, and then reduce it somehow without being killed.
Black 7 is a big point, but it gives White another chance to attack. Playing Black A would solve that problem while also building his own framework.
White 8 is not too bad, as it reduces Black's framework. In that respect, the exchange of 5 for 8 was a loss for Black. It would be better for Black to play at 8 and let White play 5.
With the moves up to 13 Black makes a base. Black 13 is slow, but very solid. If he had played at C, that would leave White with later forcing moves like B and C.
White 14 is in the wrong direction. White already has strong stones on the right, so if Black is going to make a large framework, it's going to be on the left. White has to go reduce it now, with a play at A. (See diagram.)  There are tactical mistakes later in the game, but it's these early mistakes that really stand out. It's really important to play strategically consistent moves.
Black, too, is seems to be worrying about White making territory on the right. That's unimportant now and he should be trying to figure out how to make a framework on the left. He should play A, B, or C, for example. (See diagram.)
White 16 is fine if Black answers at A, but if Black is thinking, he will play B instead.  (See diagram.)  In this case, White has to skip 16 and play at C.
Black 19 is premature. Even without it, Black can answer white A with black B. And 19 is not a severe attack on the white stones on the lower right. So Black should rush to play at C.
With 20, White is trying to get some sort of attack on Black. This is probably over-optimistic though. Unless you can actually read out a killing sequence that white 20 threatens, for example starting with a play at A, it is better to assume that there is no attack here. After all, White started out by playing  the conservative moves 6 and 8. 6 emphasizes territory, and 8 emphasizes reducing Black's framework. Neither was intended to create attacking possibilities, so it is unlikely that they will suddenly appear anyway. Black, too, played the conservative move at 13.  Suppose you could have three moves in a row, and you could play white B, C, and D, to capture black 19. Is this a big success? Actually this is quite small, as Black will play E to live, and E itself is a large move. That means black 19 is a light stone, not worth the moves it takes to capture it.  Considering everythng, it's still the upper left that is the biggest. Try white F, G, H, or I.
Donal: Black 21 is in the right part of the board, but since it doesn't attack White's group, it should have been at B. Then Black would have had a won game. 21 would be correct if for example the stone at 16 was black, because then he would be attacking White.  linkai1: A was also one of my choices for 22.  Donal: A would have been a lot better. Having played two moves against Black's group on the lower side, if you can't kill it with a third move, then you have basically wasted two moves, letting Black build a huge territory on the upper left with 21 and 23  Donal: Suppose White could next get the moves C, D, and E while Black played elsewhere. He could kill Black, but he has invested 5 moves to do it (including 20 and 22), which is too many. So if you want to kill Black, you must do it without playing white 22 first. And if you can't do that, then moves in this part of the board are too small. (See diagram.)
linkai1: In retrospect, I would have rather played this stone at D17 or B16.  The 3-3 seems too easy on Black here, both extensions are wide.  Donal: I'm not sure which one is best. The problem is you needed to act before it got like this.
White 28 is slack. Either Black A or B would destroy White. White 28 has to be at C.
Good move, was not sure what to do about it.  Donal, unfortunately, it looks like you have to just play A.
I misread slightly here.
Black 39, 41, and 43 are uninspired. Black captures two stones, but White gets incredible thickness, territory in the corner, and sente. But Black could have tried something else. (See diagram.)
Also, it's strange to atari at 41 and let White capture so easily. Better to extend at A. (See diagram)
I wanted to attack both these groups at the same time.  Donal: Attacking black 19 is small at this point. Better to attack the lower group only for now. White 46 is a good way to use the thickness White has gotten on the left.
Coming out at 47 is a little risky, as White can now play at A. (See diagram.)
Cutting at 62 is premature. This will just force Black to cut White's thin position in the center to pieces.
It would have been better to play white 62 at 69, and let Black play 62. 62 is a neutral point, and has no territorial value.
Now I get a new splitting attack going  Donal: White 70 is an overplay. White has a poor game at this point, but there are better ways to play. (See diagram.)  Let's go back a few moves and try to find a better overall strategy. (See diagram.)
linkai1: How to continue for White?  Donal: I would resign here. White is too thin in the center to support an attack. If he escapes with his two stones, he will just make things worse elsewhere.
I feel like after this attack I lost the game.
White 86 is weak. Black can cut him to ribbons. See the diagram for a better way.
Black could also just extend to A without cutting. He could have killed White outright. The lower group is safe because he can play either B or C. However, If White C becomes sente, White becomes a little stronger in the center.  Both players made tactical mistakes in this game, but it is the strategic mistakes that stand out.  Black 5, White 14, 16, Black 15, 17, 19, 21, White 20, 22,  were serious mistakes in direction of play.  Later in the game, White 62 was a conceptual mistake, not on the same level as just misreading.  Go over these 10 moves until you understand them perfectly, and you'll get lots stronger I bet.  (end of Donal's comments)
Now White seems about 10 points behind on the board
After these moves I still am about 10 points behind, and Black was able to keep the margin.  No more comments
Approaching an asymmetrical corner is bigger than approaching a symmetrical one.  White can't get territory here in one move anyway.  It's better to approach the upper left, or make an enclosure in the lower right.
Here you left the lower left unfinished.  You should probably complete the sequence.
Here, I think I should've played E-17. Isn't that joseki?  Yes.  See variation.
This move doesn't do anything for you.  You should skip it.
I think you should leave now, and do something at the bottom - either close your corner, or play somewhere around A.  The lower left is still unfinished, too.
Still I think the outcome was alright.
C11 is a waste. I should've closed my lower right corner.  Agreed.  A might even be better.
You absolutely can't ignore that move.  See variation.
Here you're creating a weak group.  Why not trade for the corner?
This is a problem for you - now you'll have a hard time handling the weak group and trying to get territory above.
Great move.
I think you should solidify the upper right before doing something like this.  Territory in the center is usually small and hard to protect.
Good tenuki.
This feels pretty small.  How about A now?
Afterwards, I felt that I should've connected at G7.  I think your move is okay if you're thinking about the center.
What does this move get you? It looks like you're trying to separate White, but then you don't finish the job.
Chicken :)  You HAVE to play at A.  Your group in the corner is totally safe, and letting White get A is sente, and lets him connect the groups at the same time.  If you're worried, B is a much better move.
I suspect you didn't know you were making a trade here, but I think this trade is actually okay.  White's groups are already strong, so the capture is only about points.  He gets ten, but you can ruin more than that with your follow-up.
This is terrible - now you give White 10, but you don't take what you have coming to you.
You still don't need this.  Take sente.  A is still begging to be played.  You have an eye at B any time you need it.
This is wimpy again.  See variation.
This is where the course of the game changed and I lost it.  I think you're wrong about that.  White gains some ground, but it's not that big.
I don't think this is very big.  See variation.  A is still kind of interesting, too.
At this point, I think you're still doing okay.  You have about 30 in the upper right, 10 in the lower right, 10 in the lower left, and around 30-35 in the center.  White has 10 in the lower right, 35 in the lower left, and 30 or so at the top.  This move isn't big enough because it isn't sente.  See variation.
A is bigger, and probably gets sente back.
This is really small.
After this, you have to do something about White's territory.
This is a mistake.
This is a bigger mistake.  You're filling in your own eye space.
You're dead.
Were you sure you're alive here?  If not, play A and make clear eyes.
Well I'm so far behind now that any corrections I could've made are over. This is the end of my comments.  This sequence is where you lost the game.  You lost a lot of points at the bottom while White finished a giant territory above.  White has about 25 at the top, 25 in the lower left, and 40 in the lower right/bottom.  Black has about 25 in the upper right, 3 at the bottom, 10 in the lower left, and 40 in the upper left.  You're behind by about 18, so it's unlikely that you can catch up, but not impossible.  Both players make a lot of zero point moves from here on.  You might have caught up with a really good endgame.
That cost you about 5.
This is worthless for White.
This is worthless.
Too small.
Worth zero.
Worth 1/2 point.
Bill: Is this move okay or should I approach the white stone in the upper left corner.  If that is better,Why?  catch22: This move is fine. An extension like this in front of your shimari is rarely wrong. Approaching in the upper left corner is okay as well. However, there are multiple options there, and if it is not clear yet (to you, or due to the board position) which approach is best, it is better to stick with a move you know to be right. :-)
Bill: I chose to attack this stone now after computers move #8 was that good or would it have been better to respond to #8 with something like A  catch22: First of all, an approach is not an attack. An approach is just intended to get a part of the territory/influence in the corner. You need a few more stones before you can call it an attack on the white stone.  Secondly, White's approach is a bit strange. It is more usual to approach at Q14 or R14. As it is, the white stone is a bit far away.  Thirdly, if you are going to respond, you should probably do so at either O16 or O17. Responding at N16 is a bit too far away. It gives White too much opportunity to mess around in the corner, e.g. by playing R17, Q17, Q18, R16 or S16.  Having said all that, I think it's okay to ignore White's approach and play an approach move yourself. With a stone on the 4-4 point it is usually okay to ignore an approach move (you will not be in too much difficultly if later there is a second approach move), and given that White's initial approach move was quite far away, it holds even more so.
catch22: White's move was a bit unusual. Responding as you did is good. You claim some territory, whereas the value of White's stone still remains to be seen.
Bill: I was at a loss as to where to play here, went with a to press the attack on the upper corner but I don't know if that is any good?  catch22: Yes, I think that the top left is now the most important part of the board. Whoever plays here first, gets an advantage there.
Bill: Move 12 seemed small for white....  catch22: Indeed.
Bill: My move 15 is not Joseki so is it okay ... I was looking at the whole board perspective  catch22: I am not entirely happy about it. See the variation for White's next move to see why.
catch22: Good.
catch22: This is a bit of a strange move.
Bill: Was 21 okay? Not sure if this was the right move to make to attack 20.  catch22: No, this is not good. First of all, this move is not doing much useful besides attacking. Should White get away, its purpose is unclear. It is not making any territory, and neither useful influence (the marked white stone limits what Black can do with any influence). You generally should not attack to kill or capture. If that fails, you may end up with nothing. It is better to attack in such a way that you gain something while doing so, even if the target eventually gets away.  Secondly, you are weakening your stones at the top left. They are not as weak as the White stone. However, you still have to be a bit careful.  See the variations for better ways of playing.
Bill: This seems kind of weak... should I respond?  I just thought there were bigger points to make elsewhere on the board  catch22: This is a strange move by White. Nevertheless, you should respond, as doing so helps you. As it is (also before White's last move), there is still a weakness in your position at H2. There's aji there that White can exploit. If you now respond at G3, that aji will be gone. So you gain by responding, whereas it is not clear what White gained by playing F4.   Furthermore, if White separates you into two groups by continuing at F3, you will be split into two. Much of your territory will be destroyed. Playing at G3 also avoids that.
catch22: Best to simply play F3. With two unsettled positions on the board already (at the top left and bottom left), it is a bit premature to play here.
Bill: I like the way things have gone so far  catch22: Yes, White has been jumping around the board a bit too much and left too many weak stones lying around. He now seems committed to save the marked ones, but doing so will harm the others.
Bill: I am at a loss as to what white is doing and hence not sure how to respond?  catch22: White's play is a bit inconsistent. It now looks as if White wants to rescue his stones at the top (or sacrifice these, and in exchange invade Black's territory at the top right). However, doing so will harm the two white stones at the left. So if White was going to play here, he should not have exchanged the marked stones.  See variation for the next move for a suggested response.
catch22: This is not good (for reasons to be shown later). See variation for a better way of playing.
catch22: White's next couple of moves are strange. White should have looked after his three marked stones first (see variation).
catch22: Bad. Unless White can/wants to rescue these stones right now, he should not make this exchange, as it hurts the three marked stones.
catch22: Also bad. It unnecessarily sacrifices three stones, and it's not clear what White gets in return.
Bill: Was this the right time to spring the attack at 45?  I could have responded to 44 in the corner but might have lost the chance at attacking here at 45?  catch22: No, this was not the right time. You should have simply responded at the top (see variation). This attack/invasion is not urgent because White has to look after his marked stones first, before he can soldify his territory at the bottom right.
Bill: Ouch?! Now I am a little worried  catch22: No need to worry. White is actually letting you of the hook. If White had played P17 this would be more difficult to handle (see variation).
Bill: I got lost here a bit and feel like I missed a chance to gain much more  catch22: Indeed, you could have handled this better.
catch22: This is not good. Unless you follow this up (e.g. by playing O18 next, still not a good move by the way), you should refrain from playing moves like this. In the game White captures this stone, which gives White eye shape. You do not get anything in exchange for this "sacrifice". So, you are effectively giving White a free move.
catch22: White lives in the corner, and takes away Black's territory here. Not a good result for Black.   Note that Black does not have to worry about the safety of his marked stones. He can capture the three white stones at anytime. There is nothing White can do to rescue these.
Bill: I don't think 61 was the right move but I wanted to solidify the large moyo I'm building.  catch22: This move is slow. Capturing these four stones is worth about eight points at best. Even if you do not play here, it remains to be seen if White can rescue these stones.  Capturing cutting stones is sometimes very big, because it can be strategically important (giving you one strong group instead of two weak ones). This, however, is not the case here. Black can still capture the three marked white stones at anytime, so the two black stones are already connected.  I would be better to play Q7. This goes a long way towards capturing the White stone there, which strengthens the three marked black stone, which in turn also soldifies your moyo.
catch22: This is another strange move by White. Playing F3 would be much better (see variation).
catch22: You should probably play D2 instead, as this is a serious weakness. See variation.
catch22: Strange. White should now really play C4 (see variation).
Bill: Don't know about this move  catch22: It's not good. Given the big weakness at C4, you should have played there instead. That not only gives you solid territory in the corner, but also reduces the amount of potential territory White can make at the left.
catch22: White should have followed through with B4.
catch22: Another strange move.
Bill: How is this move to prevent white from running?  catch22: Definitely the right idea. The other moves that spring to my mind are K11, L10 and L11. It is difficult to say which is best.
catch22: It is more important to connect to the corner by playing B4. If White plays there instead, the black stones will be in trouble. Even if they can run away into the center, doing so will not gain Black anything.
catch22: Strange. After playing the last couple of moves, White should follow through by playing M7.
catch22: The marked black stone is not important. Locally it is better for Black to connect at B4. Alternatively, Black could leave these stones to fend after themselves (and in the worst case, simply sacrifice them), and play at M8, or thereabouts, which is much bigger.
catch22: White needlessly reinforces Black's stones.
catch22: Not good. White once again needlessly helps Black to strengthen his stones. White should leave the option to atari at K9 instead open.
Bill: This move seemed not so strong  catch22: It is not too bad. If you do not play here, White could play here in sente (if you then don't play P11 in response, White can play there). Furthermore, playing here is pretty much sente for you as well.
catch22: This is unnecessary. As the three marked stones are short of liberties, there is nothing White can do with these stones anyway. By playing here now you give away a ko threat, and also the option to play at N7 in sente instead (this does not yet look too useful, but you never know).
catch22: Good. This is a good moment to tenuki. As you can play either K6 or Q8 you do not have to worry about your stones at the right.
catch22: It is better to play Q8. See variation.
catch22: A bad move. G7 would be much better shape.
catch22: It is not clear what White is trying to do now.
catch22: A good, solid move.
catch22: Playing G15 is better. See variation.
catch22: Playing H15 left some bad aji behind that White can exploit. See variation.
catch22: This is not such a good move. White may still be able to create an eye here by playing N13.
Bill: How is 147? I think it is the wrong play?  catch22: Your best option now seems to be R11 (see variation).
oops?
catch22: You can still kill White (see variation).
Rev:  From the standpoint of direction of play, the bottom side is bigger.  This is for two reasons.  First of all, if you just count the number of lines between white's stone and black's stone, the bottom side is one line bigger.  Second, E17 is low, so it makes the top side less interesting for white to develop along (can be pressed down) and for black to develop along (white's stone is low and strong, so black's extension doesn't have much effect on it).  A play on the left is also good, splitting white's side before it becomes a moyo.
Rev:  This is lax - white has invaded your framework, and is already pincered.  You should aim to attack strongly, and the first goal in that is to prevent white from sliding into the corner to get an easy base.  See the variation.
Rev:  Good.  This simple block exposes white's poor play here - he has only strengthened you on both sides.
Rev:  Perfect move.  White looks like he will soon be in trouble with two weak groups.
Rev:  Again, a simple move that gives you excellent shape and exposes white's weakness.
Rev:  This is excellent, ruins white's shape.
Rev:  Here, however, you give white the chance to do the same to you.  White should play next at the triangle.  This damages your shape, and gets white out into the open.  Instead of this move, you should play at the triangle - this keeps your shape strong, and keeps white under attack.
Rev:  This move is aimless, given that white has the two marked moves available.
Rev:  This is poorly judged.  Setting aside whether it works or not to separate white, at the very least it lets white settle his shape on one side or the other.  Later, you may want to play at A instead, to try to cut off the upper white stone.  With this defect remaining, you can just play at the triangle point here, and leave white to worry about whether he needs another move to protect his group.  The triangle move also takes profit for you, and looks at playing B or the point just above on the bottom to make a framework.
Yes, I have seen damezumari on S5, but I thought that W won't see it.
enigm4: Was this crawling good for B?  Rev:  I have heard this move called "Squeezing out the toothpaste" (you see the image if white plays at A next).  I would play at one of the two triangled points.
Rev:  Your group isn't strong enough to play like this, leaving cutting points.
Rev:  No need to hurry to play this move.  It's a ko threat at least, or you could get a forcing move at A B or C later.  Who knows which is best.  P7 doesn't help very much right now.
Rev:  Good.  White invaded too deeply, so you have a severe attack.
Rev:  You don't even need to respond here.  White dies either way.
Rev:  First of all, this is a mistake in direction.  Your huge wall is only 3 lines away - white can play at A or even B now and be satisfied that your wall isn't working very hard.  I would enter white's framework with this move.  White can attack this stone, but can't get very much territory, and if he gains a wall, it doesn't matter much in the face of yours.
Rev:  See my comments on the previous move, but it's not too late here.  Change direction and play C6 (triangle), sacrificing F3.  White will gain thickness and a little territory, but you get to enter his framework, and his thickness doesn't work much next to yours.    How should I (better then I done) response on white move #74? (to use my hudge wall on the right site)  Should I try to kill white? Where have I make mistake?
Rev:  You should consider two moves here, A and B.  B is more powerful, but you have to read it out to see who survives.  A is safer, and threatens white's corner stone strongly.
Rev:  This is bad shape, leaving a nasty cutting point.  See my comments on the previous move.
Rev:  You are behind at this point, but not by an enormous margin.  If you get to play A first, you can probably even up the game.  Right now it's gote though, and the top side/top right is the biggest area.  I've marked several very big moves.  G17 is big territorially, and also helps defend against the invasion at M17.  K15 and M16 are other ways to defend against that invasion.  S16 tightly defends the corner and takes territory.  Of these, I think G17 is my favorite.
Rev:  This is clearly a bit unreasonable, but there are plays available here.  For example, the shoulder hit at A might be a good point, or starting with the peep at B.
Rev:  See the variation for a way to capitalize on white's poor play here.
Rev:  Very big indeed, but I think it is too soon to play this.  The top right is bigger.
enigm4: Was it good move?  Rev:  This is the right idea, but it's loose.  A or B are better.  A might leave an invasion behind, but works to reduce white's framework.  B is tighter territorially.
Rev:  Pointless move by white, capturing a worthless stone.  Ignore this and find your own big point.
enigm4: Yes I know, N14 was better to make more secure my moyo on top.  Rev:  Yes, this is not an important stone to save.
Rev:  You don't need to save this stone either.  It's not doing anything.
enigm4: How should I response in this position? M17?  Rev:  N16 is fine.  See the variation.
Rev:  A is an alternative worth considering here.
Rev:  This doesn't work.  See the variation.
Rev:  How about G3 instead?  Then you get two threats - either J4 or C6 - after white responds at either C9 or H4, respectively.
Rev:  R15 is a better threat here, threatening to capture the same stones and also securing the corner.  This is my last comment.
The joseki here is J3 and I think it's better than H4 in this situation , with Q4 high , you dont have to worry about your formation being too low . Of course , because white isnt going to approach around those triangle points , this is acceptable . I think black already have a lead here . White should have choose another joseki since the marked stone doesnt really accomplish anything now .and white position is a little bit too slow .
Bad move . See the variation for explanation
Another bad move , with the O16 group already live , the capture is small .  Also , I dont think white would play N17 anytime soon .
You can still hane at P11 now and it's still the best moves  . Now it look like black is overconcentrated at the bottom (white can still invade at san-san) . So it's better to expand in a grand scale than trying to consolidate territory like this .
Normally , unless black is really thick around the corner , you can't kill an invasion at sansan . (Make it simple , you cant kill white R3 ).
Seem like an overplay .
White can seki here,  see variation for more detail .
Too conservative .
You should have taken sente to play elsewhere
0
Useless move by white , he should have play to secure the sansan . On black part , the best move now is C17 , to get a big ko .
0
This is a mistake , white could play G7 to kill H8 (see variation on 144) . My comments end here .
decker [11k]: evening
Aki [16k]: Evening
CB> this approach of a stone on the third line is not often very good
CB> this joseki will let white reinforce himself in front of his D4 stone so it's not appropriate here
CB> white should hane first - see var
CB> good
Aki [16k]: Sorry I am taking so long, I'm trying to thoroughly analyze my moves. I need to improve.
decker [11k]: no hurry at akk, i like to take my time as well most times..  CB> this move is a bit floating in the air - it leaves the top side open and doesn't really protect the weakness at D15
CB> you should attack low, on one side or the other - otherwise white can play moves like M17
CB> don't miss the chance to separate white!
decker [11k]: undos are not good play Aki [16k]: kk
CB> you take sente - good
CB> that's a bad shape: "empty triangle" - it means your H14 stone doesn't do anything
CB> yet another empty triangle...
CB> good, but you should prepare your attack with a move like M14 to help your stones in the center
CB> white is very happy to be able to play here. What you should retain from this game is to strengthen yourself before attacking.
CB> and not to make empty triangles :-)
Aki [16k]: how am i doing for a 16kyu?
CB> that's not the easiest way of blocking this "mokey jump"
CB> you could still win the game without this error
CB> this yose was sente for you... too bad white plays here first
decker [11k]: as to how well youre doing? pretty well as far as i can say, know how to block and attack, got decent space. tighter endplay and you may have won
Hi, I am Shu, I will be reviewing your game. I play on KGS under the ign Shuchan.  Your game is interesting, it seems to me that you have a good whole board sense but lacks fighting skills and life and death. I recommend you to study more life and death to hone your sense of critical points.   NickHopper [7k]: good game
This might be the first time I saw a double san-san.
Shu: Good point. Black has 3 4th line stones with strong influence vs white's 2 low stones.
Shu: Good. Blocking the other way (R16) is the wrong direction. See var.
Shu: ok, Pincering at c12 is also an option. See var.
Shu: This move contridicts your E14 move, as E14 wants to build a wall, and C17 wants to keep the corner. See Var.
Maybe I should've went to E17 without fighting at all, making good thickness on both sides?
This felt bad, I beginned a fight in the pregame, had a heavy group to begin with.
As you can see, I didn't know how to deal with G18 and it became a catastrophy. E17 would surely look better now as it might've killed the corner in this position.
This is where the "game" begun, we both made 16 ladderbreakers - instead of "fundamentals of go" and eating the ladder right away (I wanted to keep sente) I went to fight foolishly
LetMeLearn [8k]: huh this is nice reading practice : )  Shu: I recommend you attack the white group on the right now. Now, there is D11 white group and P10 white group that are weak, so you should chase them towards each other than do a splitting attack. Even if you dont do a splitting attack, you still get a nice profit. I have put some variations.
NickHopper [7k]: yea NickHopper [7k]: i thought it was breaker... NickHopper [7k]: but seems made a mistake
LetMeLearn [8k]: I know, hence tenuki LetMeLearn [8k]: Q11 is nice move though NickHopper [7k]: maybe... lets see )
NickHopper [7k]: too hard to read this for me... especially what to do later ))) LetMeLearn [8k]: haha LetMeLearn [8k]: don't worry, mee too LetMeLearn [8k]: I'm just too thickheaded to stop now :DDD NickHopper [7k]: shure it is really unbeliviable how far and precise profi can read. I cant read this not very compicated position ((  Shu: I would just take at M11.
this whole position looks absurd for black
I noticed I can't keep white separated if I try to save R12, so I had to sacrifice it.
I wanted to play some big points, as I was behind.  Shu: this doesnt really attack white or give black any territory. P3 might be a better point. See Var.
I tried to separate the left group, and kill it. Was there a better way?
NickHopper [7k]: wumps is your teacher? LetMeLearn [8k]: well, yes, you could say that heh
NickHopper [7k]: lucky ))  Shu: Death is very close for Black, Black must defend. See var.
wumps [3k]: lol
I thought it would've been a 4 point gote if I saved those stones, I was wondering if P14 was a threat or not.
...it seems it was. Now white's all connected.
Shu: As far as i can see, white can kill. . see var.
I thought this might build nice profit in the bottom  Shu: White is strong in the center, without another stone, Black cant keep the bottom.
LetMeLearn [8k]: thanks mate  Connecting here must've been really big for me, white just got huge profit.
This looks like a weird gote to me, white was unconditionally alive. Maybe he's aiming for a ko somewhere and reducing threats?  (or playing super-safe because he's so much ahead already?)  Shu: maybe a misread ;)
Shu: Big.
at this point I had no idea of how to answer. Trying to build territory with walls is wrong, I just didn't know what to do.  Shu: At this point, there isnt anything black can do.
I missed the throw-in tesuji of white.
LetMeLearn [8k]: oops . )
Why oh why didn't I respond F1.  Shu: F1 seems dangerous, Maybe E2 for defense. See Var.
LetMeLearn [8k]: you could leave something heh
NickHopper [7k]: h16 j16 still on the board )))
LetMeLearn [8k]: heh, yeah
Is there anything specific I should do when white plays two times so far towards the center like this?  J: Well, I think you got it - it is an odd opening for white, not bad for you entering the lower side
Maybe D-7 here?  I thought it was too small so moved at K-16 to attempt to create a larger moyo.  J: I prefer k16, seems a bit too early for k7. Also I'd reinforce e3 before going k7, no need to fight now K16 is big, but maybe h4 is better suited here, to establish a firm base at the bottom - I mean, E3 does not need help to live (can do that either side with ease) but h4 seems more in the flow of the game.
J: hmmm here I'd rather Q10, disturbing his high shimari ... q12 seems a bit shy
J: now W is happy :(
J: I prefer H4, h3 confines it to the lower side. On the other hand h3 is more sure, but then I'd go to the corner if the aim is to make life
J: not bad, but I'd entered the corner c4 or C3 depending on how sure you feel, before going right and escaping to the center. h3 secures a base, but that's easier and more profitable in the corner
J: this will probably help white. Theres a saying "you make strong whatever you touch"
J: this is small at this point. L5 etc I can understand, but now you should look for bigger points... D12 seems ok, p17 to play for sure and close that corner...
J: this exchange is good for you, W has made ... how many, 5 points? And you're radiating power now!
J: this is good! white is taking the upper hand!
J: just as a side note: C16 is a standard move here, but of course you are free to prefer e13 if that makes sense with your strategy (giant moyo I guess)
J: again you gave up this corner too easily! Fight for the corners, really a lot of points there!!
I think this move was just being rash and responsing to whites F-5 with a push-over move that doesn't really mean much.  Can you suggest how I should have responded to white?  J: yes. Actually you should not respond to white, but rather go on with your strategy - of course taking into account w's moves.   is F3 menacing anything? well, maybe the e3-h3 group, which starts to seem weak. F5 also contributes to enlarge white territory, so... how sure do you feel about e3-h3 futures?  IMHO, you can choose among: - reinforcing e3/h3 (maybe e2)  - if you want to invade, i'd rather d8 or even e8, connecting lter with j5/k6 and leaving white flat. - ignoring white and going for your moyo! k12?  My favourite move here, probably e8, but I'm a bit crazy ;-)
J: this is w helping
J: just for you to appreciate the size: W has secured an area of about 45 points in the left. That's *big*
J: wow, this exchange has been a bit of a mess!!! Please see the vars, I'll try to make something a bit more reasonable  Regarding k2, probably a good idea to reinforce, but j2 will also work and is easier
J: hmmm you'd rather forget about connecting, no easy way
J: wow, k2 in danger ;-)
J: M2 is bigger - you'll seriously reduce white's zone
J: at last!
J: why not q3? you can live in the corner or connect to m2 via o2... N4 is small!!
J: now you've helped him with his corner, in exchange of very little
Is there anyway I could have pushed into white's lower right corner?  I felt like I was too passive somehow.  J: yep, I think so. Please see ideas before
J: this 2 moves are small at this moment, both yours and w's
J: this, imho, is being destructive. With m11 or whereabouts you'll grow BIG and way ahead, no need to destroy w.
J: but a nice end - let's see ;-)
J: I toyed with some variations, not too tought ... anyhow, after this, the game becomes very even. Just imagine if it were you the first playing here, maybe p17, closing the corner
M-17 was better here for me?  J: I'd prefer M17, or L18,  yes, but it is difficult to say. It is very hard to defend such a big zone, and so open.  The idea should be: ok, w will live, but let's make him live small and where I want.
J: this is big, yes, ... you'll discover how expensive center territory is :-)
J: now this is a pity ... not a bad idea, but no inmediate danger, and n18 can *grow*  L18 is the biggest for you now
Still too passive?  J: yep. It was too open to begin with, and probably w had to live, but not so big. Now your moyo is small, and in the center. I'll try to make some vars...
This move was purely out of fear of some random invasion.  Is it nessecary to play a stone like this - was my moyo too large?  J: your moyo is large, but with b all around (not near the edges to go for help) I can't see any future for w there.
j: this is BIG
a non-nessecary move?  I was just paranoid.  J: yes, this is paranoid ;-)
J: no need
[SC] This is a strange move from black.  Here he is aiming to gain influence whilst taking the bottom.  The best way to deal with this move would be playing at A, which reduces some of blacks influence.  See variation for the high approach.
Here I get an approach I'm not used, I've read about how to deal with it but there I don't know if I did it right  [SC] This move works very well with the marked stone.  White will now find it hard to contest blacks influence at the bottom.
[SC] Correct move, despite the advantage black gains.
Playing at A would be a more solid move  - white will not need to worry about the cut. However D10 is also good as it aims to make a moyo quickly.  See variations
[SC] Indeed, this is the right time to develop the top.  (Personally I would play A, but making a corner enclosure is also good).
[SC] Poor move in my opinion.  Doesn't work efficiently enough with his other stones.
[SC] Again, playing at A is the optimal move.    As a general rule, playing on the 4th line avoids being confined to the sides, and allows white to contest the center.
[SC] Black is happy to push white into a low position again.
[SC] The marked stone is working very efficiently now.
[SC] White's stones are strong enough here to leave them - developing the top is more urgent.
See variations.
Black reduces whites territory, while increasing his own.
Here white should be looking to expand his moyo at the top
[SC] Black failed to punish this move.  It is much safer to push with A.  See variations.
Playing A is better, as it doesn't allow black to play a forcing move.
[SC] A necessary move.
[SC] This is good, taking profit on the left...
This is a gote move, and worth little, so best saved for the endgame.  It would be much better to take the top edge.
[SC] This is an overplay.  White can push with A and black ends up in a bad situation.
[SC] Better at A in my opinion
Now he has almost dominated the center and I did not know how to handle it, in almost every game I play  I have the corner and my opponent has the center, this is the first time I lose that way though.  [SC] Black has a weak point at 1.  White should exploit this.  See variation.
Here he is playing some bad moves if you ask me  [SC] I'm afraid after your next move black could have lived! Fortunately he didnt spot it ;)  Next move should have been A.  See variations.
[SC] Black could have lived here.  See variation.
This move is very necessary
[SC] Very bad for white, he is being fenced in.
Trying to reduce his center influence...
[SC] A pushes more into blacks territory.
Not really working
[SC] White has the forcing move of A  See variation
This move was a mistake, he cold have closed me off on q13 I think  [SC] Correct!  This will be my last comment in the game, apart from the very last move, where I've included a small general summary.
Here comes my big mistaked in a couple of moves..
I was concentrating to much on the breakthrough at h17
And this, I think, lost the game for me.
Trying some cheap method to get as much territory as possible
He makes a bad move..
Tangerine [4k]: hi amego [4k]: hi
I considered e6 but decided on e4 to take the corner.
I'm not really sure how to proceed. It seems necessary to maintain my shape.  [NM] Yes
Maybe there's enough space for m3 instead, but I didn't want to end up with a weak group. I'm probably being too lenient here.  [NM] It is difficult to say if m3 is good, with so much black influence. Black would build up more influence if white played m3   Mybe it is slightly too early to reduce this now? White may have a few tricks to invade later such as r3.
[NM] I like the shape of this move, but mybe white can tenuki?
I made a wall on the left, but there doesn't seem to be a good way to use it at the moment. I play L16 to create a central moyo, but I didn't expect black's response.  [NM] N17 is very good, and white should have seen this. The white wall now looks like a bad choice.  Not sure what the other options were
amego [4k]: be back in 3 min. Tangerine [4k]: okay  [NM] I personally like territory over making a moyo so I cannot say I like this move!   It is an interesting move and the centre looks like being a white territory unless black can reduce.
[NM] Perhaps black should play L14 to negate whites influence in the centre
amego [4k]: ok amego [4k]: thx Tangerine [4k]: sure
Maybe I shouldn't have lost sente here.
[NM] This shows consistent play with two stones working together. Good move
[NM] I wonder what you were aiming for when you played this?
[NM] White was lucky to get this.
I'm giving up the entire bottom side for the center, but maybe g17 is bigger at this point.  [NM] g17 is not big here
[NM] This is not a bad move, but there is not much territory yet in the centre with these black stones
[NM] Good move
[NM] very good
[NM] This gives away sente unfortunately
[NM] black gives away sente
[NM] nice move
Yose seems hard at this point because I have so many borders to establish.
[NM] Good
Donal: I am going to comment on the fuseki because I think you could improve your game most easily by studying fuseki. Black 2 and 4 are good, as Black is beginning to build a framework on the left.
Donal: White 5 is a non-standard play, but interesting in a handicap game as it's easy for Black to get confused.  Normally in a handicap game, Black's strategy is to try to build strength in the center and use it to attack White and to keep himself out of trouble. Following that strategy, my first idea would be to play at black A to make a solid base for Black's isolated stone, and leave the corner for later. Attaching at B strengthens White, and doesn't seem as attractive.  Another idea is to play black C, white B, and black D, as this doesn't strengthen White as much.
Black 10 is not bad, but in a handicap game it's better to play more solidly. Having opted to play in the corner, finishing up with A is worth it, since it makes the corner absolutely alive and threatens an attack on White as well. B is also very solid, and doesn't give White any place to start trouble.  Black 10 gave White the chance to complicate things. White will almost certainly answer it, and then Black would be well advised to go back and play A or B.
After white 11, Black has nowhere left on the board to build a large framework.
Black 12 is a very territorial move, so it's unusual for a handicap game. Black will end up invading at the 3-3 point, and White will get outside strength.  Playing for territory as Black in a handicap game is of course OK, but you have to realize that White can get very strong in the center, and you'll have to be very careful not to get into a disadvantageous fight.  Also, if you want to play that way, it's more consistent to play moves like A, which is very big.
Own comment: maybe better extend the upper right stone?  Donal: There are several places that I would consider. A, B, C, D for example are not bad. But Black 20 is in the wrong direction as it doesn't attack White at all, and doesn't defend the corner either. I suppose that you are attempting to limit White's expansion, but it's better to let White expand there. And in fact, White is not likely to play there anyway. He is more likely to use his strength to play at A or B.  Black 20 is an example of a very common fuseki mistake. Try to avoid this type of move and your game will get better right away.
Black 22 is much better than playing at A, but B would be even better. If you don't save your isolated stone now, then after White pinches it you should just consider it dead. There won't be any point in fighting there.
Black 24 was interesting, but it solidifies White without building either solid territory or a large central framework. So because of the strong white stones on the right, it's probably better not to make this exchange. If white 11 was a black stone, then black 24 would be great.
Own comment: Im satisfied to the game so far. I feel like W has been playing a bit slowly  Donal: White is playing a very solid game, and it shows that he has confidence that Black will dig his own grave. As White, you shouldn't have to do anything special to win.  Now about Black 26. I's a natural idea, as it splits White in two, but actually neither White group looks like it's in danger. White has an unusual amount of thickness on the lower side, and Black omitted the move at A. So it seems like Black 26 is just giving White a chance to cause trouble.  More reasonable is for Black to play A, and follow up with B and C if he gets the chance. Let White play 26 - he deseves that much.
28 is not a good answer here. Black should just block at A (see diagram).
White 31 is gote, and doesn't threaten to immediately kill the corner, but it does indirectly threaten to connect to the stones on the lower left. Black 32 takes advantage of White's slow move, but Black A would be a lot safer. If you don't like the fact that White could then play around 32, then you shouldn't have played 26 in the first place.
Naturally the reason White connects at 37 rather than just connecting at 38 is that he plans to attack the corner. White may have thought Black would defend at A, or maybe he was hoping he wouldn't notice.  Actually, it might have better for White to play at 37 instead of 35, because then 36 would not be sente, and a White play at A would kill the corner outright, instead of it being ko (see diagram).
yakito [7k]: w*
This is not good for Black at all. He will manage to live, but White is getting a lot of free moves attacking him. He should never have run away at 26.
yakito [7k]: yep
yakito [7k]: ko
Own comment: still satisfied  Donal: I play a lot of three-stone games as Black against a professional-level player. This looks quite similar to what happens to me :)  As Black, I would expect to lose this in the yose. (Naturally, his yose is better than mine.) So while I wouldn't resign here, I certainly wouldn't be happy. Naturally it would be OK if you could kill the White group on the left side, but you didn't manage to do it.  The problem is that White has such a strong group on the lower right, neutralizing Black's thickness. In addition, Black has weak points at A and B, and against a stronger player he could get into trouble later.
Donal: Instead of 70, Black should play at A. This is much thicker in the center, which could make a big difference later in the game. As a unexpected bonus, the White group becomes ko (see diagram).
Notice how White forces at 71 before living. This affected the fight in the center much later. The cutting stone at 43 doesn't look like a threat right now...
Because of White's thickness, 79 is an excellent attack on the corner. Maybe 78 was in the wrong place? Playing 78 at A, for example, would have made it possible to answer 79 with B. Even playing 78 at 79 would be better than the actual game.
Black 80 is pointless. You can't kill White here, you can't wall him in, and you need to protect the corner. So play at A to defend, let White extend to 80, and then jump to B. This threatens Black C, which would be bad for White, but if White plays at C, jump to Black D.
Own comment: wasnt sure if crosscut is the way to go. Couldn't read all the variations
Donal: Allowing White to connect at 85 right up against black 78 violates one of the "laws of go". So the crosscut is bad.
Own comment: wanted to take the outside wall instead of saving the stones
Donal: Black gave up way too much for too little thickness. There are defects at A and B, and the corner is not really alive. It will be hard to make anything out of the center.
Own comment: I feel like I should win the game from here. I would appreciate tips on how to deal with the white stones in the middle that are very very weak.
After White 101, it looks like White A might kill the corner. Naturally that was White's reason to play 101. (See diagram.)  Also, casually jumping to 102 won't be so effective because Black's own stones will have to connect all the way across to the black stones on the left to live. During that time, White will live and the center will all be neutral territory.  So instead of 102 I recommend B, which neutralizes the two white stones. (If C, then D.) That makes Black safe and he can get an attack on the two floating white stones at 41 and 47.
It seems that 106 and 108 were an overplay. These stones attack White, but they don't help solidify Black's territory at the top. And White's counterattack at 109 could get Black into trouble. So instead of 106, Black should play at A and let White live. (See diagram)
Black 114 is really risky. Not only will White get lots of opportunities on the upper side, but there is also the danger of White A, which is a strong attack on Black. Better to play B and wait to see what White does.
122 and 124 are overplays. Black has to give up a stone or two somewhere, so it might as well be 106 and 108. So he should play 22 at A to defend himself. White still has to live.
Own comment: W made a big living group and my downhill started.
Own comment: Maybe i should play more solidly...  Donal: You are making overplays trying to attack White, and leaving lots of defects in your own groups for him to take advantage of. The problem wasn't so much that White lived, but that you made your own position worse while trying to kill him.  Black 42 is awfully thin. What if Black plays at A? Kind of tricky to read.B instead of 42 looks safer.
White didn't attack the corner properly, so it lived. Now Black can answer A with B.
A good time to ignore 147 and connect at A.
Own comment: this situation was too complex for me to read correctly before it was too late. I was also afraid of w forcing move at K7  Donal: In a handicap game, if White can make things complicated he can generally do well. So Black has to play moves that are easy to read out. This game is way too complicated.  Cool anecdote: I was taking a lesson at the Nihon Kiin ten years ago from a top pro, and I was playing with six stones handicap. I had a nice center framework, so White decided to erase it. He played several strange attaching moves against stones around the board, then played an really incredible sequence in the center that threatened two ladders simulatanously. (His attachments had been ladder breakers) But I managed to find an unbelievable move right in the middle of the whole mess that stopped both ladders.  He beamed! "Brilliant play! For the last 10 moves you have been playing at pro level!" But then he dropped the bricks on me. "But tell me, could you read this all out from 10 moves ago?". Of course, I hadn't. "I read the last move out, but I was going on intuition before that..." "Then I have a suggestion that will improve your game. Play moves that you can read!" (end Donal's comments)
Own comment: bad move, didnt read properly
Own comment: the final blow
tsedi [2d]: great play by me
Own comment: I resigned here.
As far as I am concerned not a standard sequence. Normally at P14. Considering that W doesnt have a stone in upper left corner, but B in lower right the fight seems to favour B.  Nevertheless, what is B's best continuation? Q15, P15, R14, ...?  klin: Q14 is not seen very often, but still playable.  At this stage, it is hard to say what is the best move.
klin: R14 is not a good move.  But other moves you need to know the follow up move.  Just like when you played Q15 and P14 cut.  I cannot say they are bad.  But your follow-up moves can make them good or bad.
klin: W R12 too strong.  Should Q12 extend.
klin: W O17 slow.  It is the opportunity to play at R17.
I think W at R18 would be more troublesome for B  klin: R18? No.  B has P17 sente.  R18 will become a gift.
klin: B S17 can R18, then P17.  W R17 is dead.
klin: B O12, W Q12 exchange helps W.
Turning point 2: To try to press W against side, eg B at N10 or to try to take maximum territory at side and corner, eg B at P9? During the game I was for whatever reason concerned about an invasion, if B plays at N10, eg W at R7. But actually there should be nothing because of Q12's weakness... Now I think that N10 would have been better, strengthens B's centre group and I think that balance of power is in B's favour.
klin: N10 or P9 both work.  It is a matter of choice.
klin: W O9 not working.  See next.
klin: B P12 rediculous move, should P11. If W connect, B Q10, W P12, B N12, W Q11, B P8.  The result is much better.
klin: B R8 is even worse.  Should Q10.  If W takes P9, B R10 kills 4 stones.
klin: B Q8 is a typical "helping-your-opponent" move.  Should simply Q6.
klin: It is W's turn to play help-your-opponent move. N10 is meanningless.
I think that B messed up quite a bit here; several strange moves. Though B got nice territory, W's group has become quite strong.  klin: B center group becomes stronger because of W N10.
klin: W M10 keeps helping B.  W should play at L9.
Turning point 3: What is now the biggest point on the board? - Upper left corner - Extension from shimari in lower right corner - Nobi at J7  Or alternatively: - Is there an urgent move?  klin: Upper left corner.
B's group on lower side has a base, but the moves here allowed W to take sente and hane  klin: B D2 huge and important.
Impulsively played, didnt consider G9 at all
Maybe better to take?  klin: No.
klin: B B11 too slow.  Should F12, then F13.
I am not 100% sure about the order of moves here at the left side any more, but final position is matching
A play at upper side would have been huge, but L2 seems to be urgent  klin: L2 is the matter of life or death.
klin: B L15 is the last opportunity to enter the upper-left corner.  The center won't die, because P13 has one eye.  B M16 can kill the center two stones.  Now E18 is a good podition.  No comments beyaond this point.
At that stage I thought that W seems to be ahead, unless B can take some part of upper left corner. Eventually I made a reading mistake and W killed B.
Svante: Hello, I am your reviewer.
Fel that this corner was biggest, and because I have the shimari I felt that I could go all the way.  Svante: This move is exactly what White wants, because he has Q10 and can play a very nice pincer. Usually, Black should keep back one place and play O3 or O4 to avoid the severe pincer. I think that that would also work quite well with the shimari in the lower left.
Svante: This is White's aim with the right side formation. It is not as easy as in the Kobayashi fuseki (look it up at Sensei's Library), because White has no support in the lower left corner, but I think that it's still good.
This move I pondered a lot about. Which variation do you favour here? Q7?  Svante: This simple move is likely the best when you are outnumbered like this. However, it is still not easy for Black, as you will see later.
Svante: I think that playing this counter pincer now is good. Usually you would jump to P8 first, but because of Q10, that would not keep sente.
Svante: R3 is a good technique. Black now has options to later play either Q3 or Q4, depending on his needs on the lower side.
I think this is too easy for white, but I didn't find any better way.  Svante: White missed a very big chance: he should play Q7 here! That would keep his connection to Q10 in sente, and he can then help his M6 group.
Svante: Defending the lower side is now important to keep the white group weak, and it also oulines some territory.
Svante: I think that Black can't do much to keep White from settling.
Svante: This lets White get H2. Better connect solidly. The territorial loss is at least 10 points.
Svante: White settles in sente and makes Black overconcentrated. Compare this with the result from H4 at move 27.
Svante: This helps White too much. If you can't follow up with a severe attack on the top group, Black gains very little from this, but White fixes his weakness.
Now this seems a bit slow. I have too be more agressive I think. Is r12 out of the question? I can extend to m17 even though it is a bit cramped later on....  Svante: It is certainly a very big point, and I do not feel that you are too much behind. Of course, it would be nice now to have E14 at C8. However, since you played E14, you should perhaps at least try to put pressure on the white group.
Seems like white is gaining more than white in this exchange.  Svante: I think that Black got more.
Push from behind can't be good but I wanted to secure my position a bit.  Svante: You could play the keima instead.
big move I think for white. I am without base.  Svante: Your group is perfectly out to the centre, so it doesn't need a base. This is only big territorywise.
The last big point, at the same time make it possible to attack the white group later on?!  Svante: I like this move.
Svante: The shape move for defence is R17 here, making T16 gote for White. The other possibility would be to assume that White can't achieve anything with S17 when you play R15 and take sente.
white is happy. No really weak group and a lot of territory on the right side.  Svante: Black has not too few points himself. Since White's bottom group was practically alive anyway, this gote connection is just some points.
Had to try to get some territory, But I am just defending now, so it seems difficult for black here.  Svante: I think that there are some bigger points available, like B10, L18, F18. In any case, you should try to play B10 before White can fix E9.
Svante: If you can't attack, this is just a neutral point. I think that you should play L18 instead.
Felt that I couldn't just respond to white everywhere it should end the game too early.  Svante: I think that you should play B9 instead of this. That way, White's territory is open from both sides, the two monkey jumps being miai. You can also take the viewpoint that before, L18 and B9 were miai; so, when White takes L18, B9 is the natural move for Black.
m18 is more likely better, but I hoped for some territory in the center otherwise I had too little points I thought.  Svante: What do you think now? Who is ahead, and by how much?
Svante: M18 should be bigger.
p11 and h10 that's was my idea but it is a bit thin. Seems like wrong idea, but just defend seems too slow in this unfavourable position.  Svante: I may be wrong but I think that by just blocking M18, the game is very close.
Here I didn't respond well.
Felt that after defending at E18 my opponent got sente and I had no possability to catch up.  Svante: How much behind do you think you are? I think that it's just 5-10 points -- this is far less than the "error margin" of amateur level endgame.  I got the feeling that you are used to either dominating your opponents or losing. I think that you should not be afraid of a close game. One of the most important skills in Go is having the stamina to play a good game until the end, even if it takes more than 300 moves. Here, you seemed to panic when the endgame started without a clear advantage.  You could perhaps try to study some endgame, both standard situations and special tactics (tsumego). That way, you will perhaps feel more "at home" during the endgame, and you can play confidently even when it's close.
linkai [3d]: hi linkai [3d]: enjoy ago1 [4d]: hi
linkai: I've seen this move infrequently.  Donal: Although white 6 is far from the left corner, it is ideally positioned to erase the influence of black 3, so it seems fine.
Because white 6 is so far away, invading at the 3-3 point seems questionable. When White blocks at A, the position of white 6 becomes ideal. I would suggest playing black 7 at B or C instead. (See diagram.)
With white 20, I think that White has a slight lead. The combination of black 17 and 19 is slightly overconcentrated, while White has better balance.
Again, since Black is really strong on the lower left, it's slightly over-concentrated to play at 21. An invasion at A would be better. This uses strong position on the right to attack White's thin position.
linkai: I thought this wasn't so good, as Black can still invade around M17.  Donal: Since Black is already strong on the left side, it's better to attach at B. If black C, then white D.
Black 23 is good. If White blocks at A he will have poor shape with white 22 in the wrong place. So he should block at B. (See diagram.)
linkai: I am aware of the weakness of these stones, but I don't want to play anymore on the lower side as it is not interesting.  Donal: The problem is that White may be able to exploit those weknesses to make a huge center territory. Black 29 doesn't address this problem. Some move like black A or B to limit White's framework might be one way.
Up through black 29, Black has been playing a very slow game and with white 30 White seems to have a good lead. White A forces black B, and White also can attach at C. White could end up with a lot in the center.  It would have been better to jump in directly at 31 without playing 29 first. When White defends at 30 it's more usual to attach at D instead of invading, and then when White blocks at E, force at F. But in this game, White would have too much on the upper side. Black therefore makes a somewhat desperate move at 31.
When White plays 32, he is threatening to break into the corner, so Black has to be prepared to allow that and take compensation on the upper side. This position resembles a ko fight, as White is going to ignore one of Black's moves and break into the corner. That being the case, Black 33 is too passive. He should attach at A, and if White blocks at B he should crosscut at C. Now if White plays D, Black will have lots of opportunities on the upper side.
Black cannot avoid giving something up. The simplest is just to atari at A and let White cut at B and capture black 29. Note that White now has eyes, so black 33 is ineffective as an attack. (See diagram.)
Black 37 is really risky. White can start a fight by crawling at A, and he gets the upper hand. (See diagram.) Or he can start a ko fight by playing at B, but Black does all right in that case. (See diagram.)
Correct for Black?
linkai: After White cuts me, maybe this move is a little weak.  Donal: That's true, but even more important is that these stones don't threaten White. So they aren't worth saving. I would hane at A, and when White plays B, follow up with C. But it's difficult to win at this point.  Running away with a move like D is not so good, because Black's territory on the right will be reduced.
linkai: It seems Black got pushed around a little here, but the invasion was relatively (?) successful.  Donal: it's not a success, because Black is so low and White has become much stronger in the center Next White has moves like A, B, C, and D. White's thickness ended up costing you the game.
Black 59 is just unreasonable. It does threaten White's group, but when White runs away at 60 he is completely safe and in addition is erasing Blacks's territory on the right.
linkai: Is tenuki a good choice here?  I thought that this was the biggest point and there was little to attack on the right side.  The Black group seems to be able to take care of itself as well.  Donal: Black 71 is big, but other points are more critical. Black should play A, B, or C.
linkai: The game still seems pretty even now.  How to continue as Black?  Donal: I think the biggest point is at black A (see diagram.)
Too small?
Donal: There's no reason to cut at 13. This doesn't attack White and it doesn't gain any territory. In general, cutting and connecting moves are neutral points, and are only worth playing if there is some strategic advantage to be gained. It's better to just play at A or B.
linkai: I felt I had little choice but to defend.  Donal: This is the result of your original play at 59 which created a group that could be easily attacked.
When White plays 16, Black loses a lot of points. The exchange of Black 13 for White 16 is a huge loss for Black. The game is over here.  Actually, I think the biggest problem is in the fuseki. Slow moves like Black 7, 19, 21, and 29 are slowly adding up, and then Black has to resort to unreasonable moves like 31 to try to catch up. Try to maintain a faster pace from the start, so you don't have to do anything special later on to win.
I got a lot of endgame points here.
I lost a lot of points because I had to play again to defend - maybe K6 is the losing move.
my favorite first two stones :P
q10 is neither forcing nor urgent
lower side is bigger, see variarion
closing off the corner is still better
the p3, o4 exchange gives white a perfect extension
I felt this was a bit wasteful, but I know that the knights move and diagonal were needed to secure the 4x4... but I still feel I could have made better progress elsewhere.  It's OK...
The moment I played this I wished I had played a bigger move elsewhere...  yup
once again, white's happy here.    you can even tennuki after r12
I was happy with this exchange for now
Later I wished I hadn't made this move, white's influence on the upper left got really hard to deal with, and he ultimately made a lot of territory with it  yes, not only that, k16 is weak and you dont need to push a white wall against it.
you can even play one wider
white is too passive, X's instead
I would also like your opinion on my invasions and defenses, I'm still new to the concept of playing stones like this one  it's a bit too early for this kind of invasion. this white formation is very difficult to cut.  but an invasion at X is probably better.
you need to keep white cut
play more aggressively
X instead
He has the stones needed to be secure, I just wanted to see how hard it actually made it to live, but if you see a way to live I would be happy to see it :P  nope, hehe.
I got stuck here... I'm not sure if there's a way to save this group at this point
not nessecary
neither is this
X instead, see Variation for why.  You missed that move once, and whute twice
X instead, see variation for why
white here instead
bigger moves elsewhere
instead, see variation for why
easy, and no empty traingle
why?
I wanted to see how he would handle a cut at E10 next and maybe get the double atari at G9  its pretty futile here...
But I see it isn't going to happen
mosco: hi
How is this move... didn't feel like I would help myself at all in the uppe left corner by pushing the fight... thought it would just help him make secue shape so I decided to play elsewhere.  Is that okay or did I miss a better attack move to keep the pressure on in the upper left corner  AB: Well, there is not much to attack for you in the upper left. Four white stones against three black ones and noone made a big mistake there, so there is no attack for Black. Just an extension on the left would be normal and probably more valuable than the move you played, which of course is big as well.
I sort of expected something like this but that was the price for playing the san ren sei but now I get to respond and help settle my group  AB: You can count yourself a little lucky here, I think a White move at D12 would be much more severe. Now at least you can still settle your group relatively easily with C12.
AB: Good.
AB: A little bizarre, F17 would be normal.
Okay now I like the way things are going since white looks way to concentrated in the upper left corner  AB: No, White is not concentrated in the upper left, quite the opposite. Your group is squeezed there but that is the price for the san-ren-sei. F3 is very good, overall Black's position is good.
AB: I would have played the "normal" move D6 without hesitation as it helps White C10 stone as well. The attach-and-extend joseki is rarely seen in even games, more in handicap games. Strange that White plays is twice in a row now.
I don't think this was a good move?  AB: Correct, this move is bad. Simply because E3 is such a great point for White. You should play there yourself, D3 is also possible.
AB: Now it is obvious that the sequence is good for White. White has a strong group plus points and Black has three heavy stones that still need to be looked after.
Now after the game is over I would have made that move one more space to the left, but at the time I liked the shape  AB: Yes, L4 is much better, one line can make a big difference.
Never really expected an attack like this, haven't seen this much, not sure if I repsonded right  AB: That is a little strange move. White seems to play a lot of handicap games. First the attach-and-extend joseki, now a typical White nine-stone-handicap approach. I think a normal approach at R6 is quite good.
AB: Hane is correct.
He got some space  to live but I think I get more  AB: Altogether Black handled the situation quite well. White has not achieved much.
AB: Good direction.
AB: Now it is obvious that the M4 stone would be much better placed at L4. From both sides this stone is badly placed.
AB: Not sure this is such a good idea. The Black group in the upper left is weak. Maybe H6 would be a good idea to increase the size of the moyo and protect some of the weaknesses. Black would be ahead.
AB: Better at D9...
AB:... because Black can (and should) connect underneath. See variations.
Now I really wish the three marked stones on the bottom left were not so isolated... this could cost me some  AB: And it should :-). Mistakes must be punished, this is the only way to learn.
AB: Not good. White is too afraid here. The one stone at K4 is light and can even be sacrificed. White should answer the Black move at F6 or better even at F7. This will cut Black and put the two stones on the left under pressure. With two weak groups on the left alone the game will become difficult for Black.
AB: Not sure about this one, White could ignore it. Simply G8 improves Black's overall position and protects the G6-cut as well. The game will be difficult for White.
not sure if this was the right move here... wanted to block that point to attack the two stones in the middle?  AB: Not sure that this is the best possible idea. White can always let go of the C10 stone in the worst case. How about a clear attack on the two stones at K8?
AB: Overall I think White has gained from the E14-G10 exchange. The cut at G6 becomes more of a problem now.
again not really sure if this was a good move or not  AB: I think the cap at K8 is better direction, but I may be wrong. For me the territory you get there with M6 is too small. It reinforces the M4 mistake if you want to see it that way. If White plays M6 after Black K8 Black still gets the points to the fourth line, so the gain by M6 is not much. On the other hand, Black would have a much more active game in the center.
AB: Now basically White is more or less out of trouble.
AB: Greedy. The cut at G6 is now a serious problem. The complete Black group already does not look so great, but cut in two it will be difficult.
AB: The worst move ever! If you ever read about Thank-you-moves, this is the blueprint here! All along I have been talking about the cut at G6. Well, if you are afraid to play at G6, at least do not rob yourself of the opportunity to play it.
AB: Thank you very much. Now Black is out of trouble.
AB: Just like in the attach-and-extend joseki L6 is the shape point.
AB: It is unnecessary to fix the shape now.
AB: I think the connection at B10 still works.
AB: Now of course the result is bad for Black and the group in the upper left now somewhat in trouble.
AB: Does this work?
AB: Didn't think so.
So all of that clearly was not the way to go about it... my efforts were intended to build up my shape, solidify my positions while attacking white, but I just conected his groups and gave him a great opportunity to attack my stones?  AB: Well, it was still White who made the worst mistake. The trouble for Black would have been far greater had White cut you in two in the bottom left. Overall the game is still good for Black it seems as the group in the upper left is not going to die.
AB: Good and important.
AB: Bad. Atari at A11 is normal.
AB: Now Black can jump to A5.
AB: It's difficult to come up with something for White now.
AB: Black should answer White's move here.
AB: Why not jump to S17? That is really big and could seriously turn around the game.
AB: Is there not something more active, such as J15 to attack the two stones? The Black move seems slow. A large endgame move, such as A5 would also be better.
AB: Good.
AB: What is the purpose of this? Black is alive.
AB: The idea is not bad, though it will be difficult to construct something here. N11 might be slightly better.
AB: Seems small.
AB: Is this necessary?
AB: White gained two points here, that is way to small for the current state of the game. All the marked points are much larger.
AB: The monkey jump must never be gote, so G19 would be better here. Then White must D19, but Black can ignore.
A
AB: What? No need to connect two living groups. Is this even one point? I think not.
AB: Big. See alternative previous variation for White.
A
AB: Why not A2? White cannot A1.
AB: White got A2 in sente, this is big.
AB: Again, T18 would be better.
AB: Small. A18 is much bigger.
AB: Not necessary yet, I think.
AB: T18 is large.
AB: How about T18 :-)?
AB: Uh oh.
Deterius [11k]: gg
g4: good
g4: This leaves te corner unprotected. If you want to play there R5 secures the corner virtually.
g4: Attaching makes both groups stronger. Do you want to make white stronger here?
g4: If you want to attack the 2 stones, a move around J16 or J17 seems appropriate. But this fight seems unreasonable to me. White has allies at Q14waiting.
g4: First A15! I think white has to respond. I he does not your group is very strong.
g4: Now white takes the corner.
g4: This doesn't work. see var
Here I was very sure the W group is dead and the corner is mine.
g4: White is dead. Game over. P3 involves a ladder so you have to be carefull.
g4: As you lead, I would prefer the contact play at R9. Your group is alive then and you can attack without caring for the live of your group.
g4: Big, but... It is nearly endgame now. All groups seem secure. When you count, you realize that black is 50 points ahead. So it may be most easy to secure your groups and end the game. Both groups above and left of the lower left corner are not completely alive. You should play moves there to secure the lifes of the groups while gaining some territory. See some vars
g4: This has the same territorial value as a move at L2. Your left side group is completely alive and strong. Your P2 group may come under attack. So always strengthen your weak group.
g4: Better at G2. This leaves a gap at F4, G4.
g4: This is a strong and good move securing a lot of territory. Maybe E8 or even F8 secure more, but also not so tight. An alternative is the strong cut thru F4! See var
Here I tgought B tries to capture the Q3 group.
g4: This is the shape move. But it does nearly nothing for security or territory here. Your groups are strong already and this gives no more territory.
g4: Oh no. The losing move.
Here my corner belongs to W. g4: That was unnecessary. Just connect and nothing will happen.
g4: Far too small. You made an error but don't stop thinking! Perhaps you can rescue the group. The 10 stones in the center are unimportant. If you could save the corner you will still win the game. See vars But if you lose the corner you still have a chance. The only weak white group is at the top. Perhaps you can attack it and gain territory. If you count you will notice that the game is close still
I can not save the corner. Therefore T4 was a waisted move.
g4: This was sente already. So this group is completely alive. Not necessary to play here now.
The Q3 group lives. Just a small comfort g4: Unnecessay. This group lives without this move.
g4: Unnecessary. White cannot break thru. To secure the group Q10ß is the move. This is nearly sente. see var
g4: Now white secures his group. The invasion is no longer possible. And your center gets small. Game over
g4: No. Connect at E16.
g4: White is gentle D16 kills the 5 stones. They can get only one eay whe taking E18.
I think there is no advantage of B13 to A13? B looses just some points.
g4: Good sequence by white
g4: T15, M18, H16 are all bigger
g4: ?
g4: No. Connect. If white thrusts and then plays P18 he has 5 liberties. Both of your groups have 4. If you connect nothing will happen. You still have a slight chance.
Here I am dead again
g4: T15
Here again I thought I got him.
Here he prooved I was wrong.
siori [8k]: thx Deterius [11k]: thx for the game siori [8k]: thx for the game  Now I resigned.  I would be very hapy for any idea.  Thanks for the review Deterius    This was an interesting game. I think you play very good in the opening. Try to evaluate the relative strngth of the groups. Be careful when your opponent tries to cut. Try to count liberties. If you would have played very conservatively, you should have won the game easily. I think you are on the right way.  Have fun Peter
If you dislike big frameworks, as I do, you could try something more funky to prevent it. See variation for white at A.
This move seems a bit passive. I would prefer to do something with the black's already big framework. See variation.  Also, sanrensei is an influence oriented strategy, but after black taking the key point at A, white cannot hope to utilize it very well. Also the almost absolute next white's move B doesn't play well with this framework.
Pincer is possible: it is looking to separate white stone from the sanrensei, which is a good strategy. But I would prefer to play the looser pincer at A. It accomplishes the same task, while being less attackable by white. Also, with A, black can aim at B later.
This move is strange. See variations at A and B for what I would prefer.
This move should be good. Other possibility is to play at A, but it seems it's not that good in the context of the whole board. See variation.
Black usually plays at A to defend the top and white pincers at R9 (see variation) but here it's no good for him, so he plays here. Naturally, as he hadn't defended the top, white can do something there.
This move is not necessary. It makes black's corner stronger. S16 should be saved for making life and endgame. Here white is fully out, so he has nothing to be afraid of.  See variation for what white can do with the corner.
This move should be at A as that would put more pressure on black.
Again, this move is for endgame. A much better.
And again. After this, A wouldn't even be sente, as black is alive in the corner now.
This move is bad. White cannot hope to kill black.
Not a bad move, but I think A is better for black. He would get a better shape for running out into the center.
Saving the marked stone is worth two points and is tottaly unimportant for both players, as there are still 20+ points worth moves.
This is very small and also doesn't attack the black group at all. Possible moves for white here are are at the marked places.
This move is not important, as black can't be attacked seriously (he is almost alive and can also get out). Black should concentrate on making moyo, or invading white's framework.
Again unimportant.
This is a very important move. Now we can see that black is ahead, having two big frameworks on the left and the top and also some territory.
This move is bad. It is for attacking purposes only, when there is white stone at A or B. Here, white is just helping black stabilize himself. Instead, white should play tsuke-nobi (attach and extend) joseki, because the marked stone is well placed. See variation.
After this exchange, both got approximately same amount of territory, but black is stabilized and there is still weaknes at A (see variation), so white is not good.
A good move.
White has no other option than to invade. This is a good place to start from.
This black move is bad. If he feels an urge to defend the middle left group, he should play A instead. But really he should attack and for that, B is the keypoint.  If there is a losing move it is this one. By not attacking the invading white stone properly, black didn't gain anything at all and even lost much of his potential territory. Such is a game of go. You can lead by much first 50 moves, but any mistake will cost you your lead. Therefore, never slack, play to your fullest potential the whole game.
This move is also bad. White is creating a heavy group. He should play A instead.
Again, not good. The group is even heavier now and the cut isn't that big. Jumping at A is still better.
Both sides continue to make these bad moves...
This is not a place to play at all. Black should play A and continue the attack to build territory.
A bad move. White group is very strong and practically alive, so no need to play here. Also, this move helps black build territory.
This is the place to play.
Here black's play at A is a bad shape (emptry triangle) and the group feels a little weaker than with the play at C. The correct shape would be at B, but here it doesn't work. Therefore, black should play at C.
This is not a good move. Black's group is strong, so white cannot accomplish anything useful here. He should play at A to move out.
A very bad move. Black should play at A to stay connected.
This move let's black connect. See variation for the play at A.
The marked stone is utterly unimportant. Why do you need to capture it? Black will just walk out of the atari and what will white do then?  Therefore really no need to play here. Instead play at A.
Now white has three weak groups!!!
A bad move. White has completely forgotten about the weak marked group. But this is a result of playing Atari at A. White got only what he wanted.  So I think no need to emphasize, but white should play at B to save the weak group and not here.
No need to save these stones by black. He should play from the other side and sacrifice. See variation.
White stubbornly continues to ignore his marked group...
White managed to connect here via black's bad play.
Black doing very bad here. Just helping white build territory.
This move is questionable as white can attack neither of the black groups successfully. I would prefer to play at A to defend.
Attacking this strong black group is pointless. It already has half eyes at A and B. If white tries to destroy those eyes, black can easily run away, even threatening to kill the left white group.
Black can think about A. See variation.
A bad move. White cannot hope to accomplish anything with a half-dead group. A play at A is a must!
]
This is what I would call a blunt attack by white. He tried to kill so hard that he got his own group killed. This happens often even in dan games. For the future: try more to foresee where the attack will lead and whether you can gain something by it. If you can't, it's not a good attack. But if you even lose more than your opponent, then it's really horrible.
White should of course sacrifice the marked stones and live with A. Saving them destroys one of his eyes and also threatens to destroy the other one.
Black also lost a track again. He could kill at A.
This is a bad move. It can be captured by black at A.  But more importantly, white should have played at B. There are many interesting variations there  (I encourage you to work your way through them) and he can live with at least part of his group.
This is a mistake by black. He has to defend at A.
White should have played at A to exploit the weakness. See variation.
This is very small, considering white can cut at white A, black B, whice C.
Why hasn't white cut? It seems ignoring a major plays is a common theme in this game.
This does not kill. Black defends at A. To kill, white plays at B.  Black even has C, so he really is alive. But for the sake of the following discussion of next few moves, assume there is a white stone at C.
This would be a mistake, if there was a white stone at A. Black should have played at B in that case.
This still would not kill, even with a stone at A. The keypoint is at B.
Again, this would die with the stone at A. Black should have played at B.  The reason why I am still repeating this is because it seems both players play as if there indeed was a stone at A :-)
A very bad move. It is important to defend the territory at A.
Bad. White needs to cut, not to make black connect. See variation at A.
Up until now black's plays were sente to make a second eye or to connect, so they weren't absolutely bad in that he wouldn't die after playing them. But this is clearly a mistake, as white can kill black with A now. Similarly, black can kill white at B.
White noticed this spot finally after 50 moves. Still, killing black at A is a lot better than this.
A bad move. White is alive now. See the variations at move 144 for the correct play by both.
As for everyone who plays go, there are many areas you can improve in. The most important topics for you to study, based on this review are:  -- Life and death -- there were some mistakes in this game. It also has to do with letting your group lie around with unsettled. Moreover, doing a lot of life and death problems is a most certain way to improve.  -- Global board position judgement -- just experiment in fuseki with the ideas from this review  -- Awareness of the urgent play -- to let your group lie around for 50 moves for your opponent to kill it, or not to kill your opponent's one when you can is a huge error. It has to do with the previous point. Just look over all the board, and ask yourself: "Is this alive? Could this be killed?". It is important to always know the precise status of every group on the board so that you play moves that need to be played and decide your strategy accordingly. You certainly shouldn't go invading enemy framework, when one of your groups is about to be killed...  -- Principles of attacking -- when attacking, don't look for a kill. Always try to visualize for yourself the resulting position after the planned attack. The goal is to build territory and/or influence while attacking. If your attack does not achieve that, it was a bad attack to begin with. More on this in the book Attack and Defence by Ishida and Davies.  -- Light and heavy play, shape -- this is an advanced concept, but you too can learn from it anyway. You certainly know situations, where you had to save big cramped group without eyes (in short, a heavy group) and your opponent happily attacks you. No matter whether you can survive or not, saving such a group almost always involves your opponent developing a good position and so it is a loss (that is, if he attacks correctly, as explained in this review. Going for the all out kill is a primitive and usually bad way of attacking and should be avoided). Instead of making such heavy groups, be prepared to sacrifice some stones in order to get a better shape. More on this in the book Shape Up! by Charles Matthews.  Of course, no amateur can hope to comprehend all of this and utilize it well in their games, even if they devoted years to study go. I am weak at all of these points myself, otherwise I wouldn't be reviewing your game, but playing professionaly in Japan :-)  But we can always struggle to get a little better, so I hope I have given you some useful pointers.
I really don't know much about fuseki. I feel maybe I should have adapted mine to fit his slightly unusual one.  TL: It's not unusual...or to put it correctly...this fuseki is only rare in kyus' game. You will see it many times       in pro games or dans or even high kyus'.
TL: At this point, it gives me the feeling that b is slightly overconcentrated. The pincer seems better (see variations)
TL: This clearly is overconcentrated
TL: W's invasion here feels a little bit early.
I don't understand what he was trying to accomplish here.   TL: This might be just psychological effect. W probably feels that b's right side is closing and thus he wants a piece of it.
TL: This move is not ideal, since w is on 3-3. The right way to attack would be D4 (see variations)
I wasn't sure where to approach a sansan point so I just played somewhere close on the third line.
TL: B is going easy on w. Now w can run, split b and feels happy about his accomplishment. Again, this is the direct result fromthe extension at F3
I thought maybe I could get the corner or at least some influence.
this move looks wrong retrospectively but I can't figure out what it should have been
Was this the best place to attack the white group?   TL: No, since after this,  (1)  b looses the corner and (2) w gets out just fine. W also has forcing move at E 7 (see variations)
TL: This move is unecessary.
I feel that I should have played around there before he did.   TL: W still has lots of weaknesses here (see variations). And thus an invasion is possible.
I didn't know where to approach so I just went about halfway between the two stones.   TL: B should have put pressured on the upper right group. Either (1) play close to it or (2) push down from above if b wants to get influence (see variations)
TL: This is small. F 17 is the right move.
My opponent didn't seem to think the local situation was urgent as he played  tennuki herebut it seems like it would be to me.   TL: This is a yose move. Try something like C6 or C4 instead.
I still don't understand what he was doing here   TL: W is trying to make a good shape.This move is not really ideal, though.
TL: B tries to connect/ extend, but this move doesn't really accomplish anything.
He seems to be putting himself into bad shape here for reasons I can't fathom.   TL: W misreads.
TL: This move looks out of place. The idea to seperate w is good, though.
TL: W moves here is small. B should not answer. Instead b should L7 or some near place to separate the 2 w groups.
TL: small
TL: Seems too aggressive. At this point it is hard to kill W
It seemed like there might be a possibility of killing his group
I seem to have played rather conservatively here.
I knew I should probably attack his big moyo but I wasn't sure where.
I think I should have been able to kill the D9 group here
I thought there might be some possibility of life
TL: The rest is just yose.
In restrospect, this move seems rubbish. i can't remember why I played it.
I thought that I should probably connect my two groups, but now I'm not sure I gained so much by doing so.
it looked like if the shape had a vital point, it would be there  TL: vital point...only if w doesn't already have 2 eyes.
I dont really don't know how should I react to that pincer so decided to run to center  TH: This is a perfect continuation - but I worry slightly that you did not know how to react.  Try to be prepared at least one move ahead for any response to your approach move - look at a joseki book after each game that you felt confused in. When you get to 10 kyu, you'll need to start learning a few common joseki.  A good free joseki guide is at http://waterfire.us/joseki.htm
TH: White plays a trick move, trying to connect underneath.
white secures corner, so I decide to seal white in.  TH: not the best move, but reading ahead in a joseki can be difficult at your level. Look at your stones - they could be separated easily. On your move you *could* have separated white by playing D2.
TH: This is the first big mistake of the game.  The triangle stones are strong. If white plays A you just play B and get even stronger. (A would be a mistake by white)  Because the stones are strong you should not play near them - more stones there are a waste! You should play far away from your stones, and tempt white to invade later - then you can use the strength against white.
TH: Because of E7 your stones look heavy now.
TH: White makes a mistake. By playing Q17 you can force white to make small territory while you take good influence.
once again, I give corner to white and get influence to center  TH: This move gives white a big corner. Look at the variations for joseki.
TH: White gets an ideal reducing move.  This move was very good. Look at it for a while - get a feel for how hard the stone is to attack - and how little territory black can get on the right now.
TH: instead of fighting directly, it may be more urgent to play either N16 - to close white in - or K3 - to take a big territory point.
TH: You must defend the cut at A  White can damage you by cutting - and may make easy life later.
TH: The cut at R11 works now - see variation.
TH: White gets a big point.  A and B are big points for black now.
TH: Second really big mistake.  You played too close to your strong stones again.
TH: A bit too close to the white stones maybe. White could cause trouble at L3.
TH: You sacrificed J3!
Trying to seal white in...  TH: This is another big mistake - again you play a stone too close to strong stones - this stone won't make any territory in the game and it doesn't take any territory either.  White's stones are strong and she doesn't need to react to this stone.
Should I have playedto g17? Now White got upper side of board  TH: Yes, you should have played F17 earlier.  Now you can still reduce white by playing C17. I can't tell whether it lives for sure or only gets a ko, though.
TH: This stone does not make territory - and it is not severe against White's P10 group.  White is almost safe because she can still cut at R11 or run.
TH: White makes a big framework.
TH: It looks like this move is a thoughtless reaction to white's last move. You could make real points at A,B,C,D or E, but this move does very little, and white need not respond.
TH: ok.
TH: very passive. You seem to be thinking "I'll make the right hand side into territory."  You forget that white can make a much bigger and more efficient territory with her next move.
TH: It looks like you are finally trying to put pressure on white's group.  You chose to play on the upper side, where you can't make much territory. M6 makes more territory.
TH: This move looks like an automatic response as well. White can cut at R11 now and it works.
TH: This move is not needed - white won't respond. White will take a big point and win the game.
TH: A very big move.
I'm trying to reduce that huge white area upper left corner   TH: Play C17 instead.  You need to count. White is at least 20 points ahead - so you need to make a BIG impact. Invade!
TH: Small
TH: Ignore the atari.
TH: White and black have nothing to gain from this point. White should cut at R11.
TH: Again, this point has no value.  The game is clearly whites.  I make a few comments from moves 157 onwards.
I wanted to prevent white attack to G5
Monkey jump :)
Maybe 3-3 invasion works...
TH: White kills by connecting at B15.
TH: B15!
TH: You should know that this shape is killed by white B19.
White should have played a19. I guess I got lucky :)  TH: Very - see continuation.
TH: Here white should play a ko threat - then fight to kill.
TH: Lucky again
I dont really understand why white did this....
TH: mistake. Should be at M17
TH: Waste - see variation.
Was this move necessary? It looked dangerous if white cuts in so I played safe.  TH: not needed. Some tips at move 225.
I was happy about this move. Q6 would be more useful for black. Am I right?  *********** I am not familiar with any Joseki variations starting from Q6.  This is standard Joseki.   In terms of whole board play, I would imagine that black would prefer to be on the star points for this type of play, but I am not strong enough to say.
************ I do not like this pincer. White will run, black will chase and get thickness from the Q12 stone. But there is plenty of space below for white to come in and live. Black will then be overconcentrated.
I guess this is not joseki. What would be the proper move here? ******* This is Joseki. See http://gobase.org/joseki/chap4/joseki4.html.
*** The hit on top and extension is correct. But I have no idea what the full board effects are.
********* This is a highly complex Joseki variation, and I doubt any of us knows what the effect of all this play is.
********* In the end, this result is favorable for Black. White's corner is fairly small. N16 is useless. Black thickness across the board is impressive.
I was afraid of Black R5. Is S6 the right time, or is a kakari in the lower left mor urgent?  ************** Hard to say. IMHO, I think the Kakari is more urgent. White still has some wiggle room on the right even if black plays R5 - at least a reduction is certainly possible.  White is behind and needs to move faster to catch up. IMHO.
********* This is the wrong direction at this point.  You generally want to push toward thickness. Play from C14 or thereabouts will allow black nice possibilities on the bottom left.
******  This is a bit risky, rather than responding at C14. White is probably better off doing the variation first.
********** This is yet another complex Joseki variation which I don't know how it plays out.
This seems wrong. See variation.
*************** This is bad for black, especially considering the variations.  White is comfortable, and while the corner is big, black's thickness has been neutralized.
good or bad? ******** Bad. This is unnecessary for the safety of the white group and gains less territory than helping the D5 stone. Play around bottom left is correct direction of play.
******** Although the followup moves are kind of big, play on the bottom left is still bigger IMHO.
******* This is good, though I would play closer to D5. You are too loose in general with your play, not enough safety.
***** Now you pay.
Would not F3 be better for Black?
************ White's gain here is small, black's is large.
Is this good in terms of direction of play? **** Yes. It chases the black group toward your left corner stones.  It is a good move.
I did not like the idea that balck could take my stone in sente. However: is this the right time?  **** No. And taking the stone is not Sente. See variation.
I considered this a slow, not urgent move. Am I right?  *********** Absolutely. I think Black was thinking of R14, R13,P14,Q12,O14, which cuts off the five stones above. But if black responds at Q13 instead of R13 he is fine, and the loss is very small - not worth eliminating in gote.
Here I would like to have some suggestions what to do better with the C10 stone.  ********* Well, its in trouble, so there isn't a heck of a lot of possiblities. The variation you played out was bad. See the variation.
Overplay?  ********* Yes, the N4 group is weak, and you can split this stone and them.
******* Exactly
******** Way too slow by black.
Mistake? If Black wants to seperate he must risk a ko here. Is my analysis correct? **** Don't see a Ko.
******** Pointless move by black.
******** Too little, too late. Black should push on top
**** Black lost sente for nothing.
******** Black needs to help H7 group.
********** White should have made this move 10 moves ago, not black. It was always sente.
******** Who wins the capturing fight?
****************************** So to conclude, it appears that while black gained some advantage early on, he became confused and over-cautious in the fighting that followed. White's aggressive style was successful.  Generally though, White will find if he does not prepare attacks more and insists on complexifying the game that he will lose against players more able to punish him for his plays. The result on the left hand side here is an example of what can happen if white goes too far with this style.  Good luck with your games and I hope these comments were useful.
[kb]: My idea was to play calmly until it was obvious I should be attacking something.  R:Principal idea is as follows: In handicap game,  black vs white ratio is maximum in the begining stage i.e.   four black stones vs one white. However, thereafter the differences are becoming smaller and smaller, e.g.  after 1oo moves 54black stones and 50 white. Therefore, if you find a weak stone cluster, black must attack it in early stage. As star stone (Q-16) is living, black  must attack on white stone (c14) as shown in number order. The position of number 3 stone (I select D10, though a professional player teached me D11-selection).
[kb]: What's the best way to handle this? R: Black 12 move was right way.
R:This connect (A) is too defensive.  B move is the best as shown in a next branch. As this pattern is so often seen, I comment it in detail.
[kb]: I thought this was an OK result for B, although White B4 is annoying.
[kb]: I didn't know how to respond here so I tenukied.
R: Now two black stones(5 stones and  are separated
R:A is best for black.
[kb]: I misread here.  I should have just cut, or left it. R: This move help opponent.
[kb]: What to do? R:This move is good.
[kb]: At this point I felt the game is still well under Black's control.  Positional judgment says I'm still up by 30+ points or so.  Black's moyo is large!  R:This 60 (L16) is slack. Urgent point is circle point. If black 6 stones and a stone(R9) connect to each , then two white stones (p11 and R11) must live.  Large moyo is not definite territory. Living or not is much important.
[kb]: This trade seems good for Black. R: Loss of  6 black stones is great.
[kb]: I tried to cover the 3-3 here, but now I know the attachment at L17 plus 3-3 is probably very hard to stop.  How should I play here? R: black 60 move is too weak. black should attack white. Q14 move may be good.
[kb]: Maybe a bit of an overplay. R: 60 move seemed me a good selection
R:As left side is so narrow, 68 move should be  opposite side (circle).
[kb]: Good move.  I can't chase it out.
[kb]: Now I asked my opponent during the review what to do here. He suggested the first variation.
[kb]: At the time I thought that I could run my weak group at the bottom to safety by forcing White to live, but I underestimated the strength of his stones. R: Now black cannot save all  stones, circle position may be a good  connection.
[kb]: Now I am in trouble.  The rest of the game went very badly for Black (and will go no matter what variation is chosen) and is not worth reviewing.  Thanks for your review. R: If do you had a consideration of weak stones (no living) or strong stones (living), you will do  remarkable  progress.
Hi, I guess you are black right?
Black's playing here is too careful. Usually in opening, you should play at Q10 or R10. There's no need to worry about invasion at R8 as you can always play R3 to turn around.   By the way, white playing at N4 is kinda questionable too. I rarely see people play that. It seems very loose. Maybe I am not good enough to understand the move.
J4 invasion is too early. Don't invade too early, you invasion will enable your opponent to build a large frame work even if you manage to run out.   Don't be jealous of the land that your opponent has. You can get your own share on the other side of the board too. Besides, the spacing of white stones are very loose and can be invaded later on anyway.  There's a lot of big points on the board. C15 is good.
You can just leave it your J4 stones there and get some other big points on the board, such as the C15. Lower right is not solid territory yet as there's R3 points for black to exploit.   And there's a lot of trick to invade on the lower left too.   I don't know about you, but my style is to make myself thick before doing any invasion. :)
Hane at the head of 2 stones. Good.
Hmm. This move is a bit too much on the caution side. Maybe should just keep extending at K7. White can't cut at J5 for there's a ladder.
That moves is a bit slow for white. The biggest point on board is still C15.
A bit of overplay. White is stronger at the lower left and black get too closed to it. Black can get into trouble if white decide to attack at C11.
Now white is overplaying
Instead of this, black can play D15, a very thick move.
This seems to be bad for black. Black has more stone at the rhs, but now it's under attack.  Black played a bit too soft there.
So far left hand side seems good for black.   By the way, M17 sente for black too. Should play it soon.
Hmm... This move is slow?   Should attack at N9 area. Don't need to worry about LD of the left group as M17 is still there.
Now white connected back :(  Once white plays R4 the game is really hard for black.
After some small move, you finally got it :)
I've always have a problem by stopping my opponent's atack. Sometimes I even get a little obsesed with that. This time I think I managed it well, but I would like to know if I could do better. (Also in move 87)
Maybe you can even try E7.
Nice :)
Another nice yose for black :) How about Q17 then M17?
Is there any better move? Could I take more points from there? Maybe B8 bigger.  This is bigger than B8. But Maybe T16 is bigger than both of them.   Besides, play B9 instead of B8, b9 is sente.  I didn't comment much on your yose, but a lot of the moves both black and white did were pretty small.   Should always get sente yose first.
Anyway this attack could be succesful or was it a waste?  Waste...
Should I played first at E1, shouldn't I?  Sure. E1 is sente. And sente is always BIG.
enlapaz [13k]: hi
A is a better point.  The corner positions on the left have a primary and secondary direction for develpoment.  The one at the top develops best down the left side, and the one at the bottom develops best along the bottom.  The position on the bottom right also develops best along the bottom.  So A is in the direction that both Black and White want.  The move at 10 is not as good because it doesn't work as well with the stones below.  Also it's on the fourth line, while the rest of your stones are on the third, so it's going to be hard to get a structure going in the center.
This isn't really a good idea - you're bending against stronger stones.  You should back off at A.  I realize you don't want Black getting into the potential area to the left, but he can anyway.  See the variaition.
Luckily, Black screws this up, and gives you some stones.
Good.  You can't just let Black have this giant space to the right.  It's about time you did something about it.
Here Black gets distracted by your single stone.  You took the right approach - letting it go and making life in Black's moyo.  Black should have gotten a lot more out of this next sequence, but he wasted moves capturing the stone.
Nice job.  Now you're alive.
And you lived in sente - this is HUGE!  Now you can take another big point.
Your focus here should be to make life.  If you really try, you might make 6 points here.  If you make eyes only, you'll get two.  The difference is small, so it's not worth spending moves to try to make more space.  You already have eyes at D and E, so you should leave and take a big point.  You're a little thin around A and B, or you might play something like C.
Again, you should ignore Black's move.
That's three times now.  If you play even two of these moves on the left side, you have an easy win.
Up to this point I thought that I'm winning. What was wrong in my play later? What could I do better?  You are definitely winning.  You should have taken a bigger point instead of this sequence at the top, but you're still doing fine.  Black has about 33 in the upper right and 60 or so in the lower right.  You have about 30 in the lower left and potential for around 85 on the left, and you have 6 in the right center.
Good - you don't need to be greedy here.
This is a big mistake.  You have to take gote here because you've shortened your own liberties.  See variation.
This lets Black ruin more of your potential territory.
You should probably just defend at A.
This doesn't really threaten anything.
Luckily Black answers.
This is really from the wrong side.  A would be a lot better.  With A you lose a little bit of space below, but keep everything above.  See variation.
Now Black starts eating the territory above.
You probably have to back up to A at this point.  See variation.  At this point your territory above is going to shrink quite a bit.
This is off the mark.  You don't have any problems here.  What you need to do is try to block Black out of the territory here.  See variations.  You can also start a ko at A to try to cut him off.
At this point, you're behind in the game.  You need something big now.
This is the right idea, but the wrong point.  A might work.  See variation.  You should probably start the ko on the left, and then use moves in here as ko threats.  You'll wind up having a lot of big ko threats that way.
Free move.  This gives you a chance.
Wow, another free move.  You should not answer this.  Now you can probably live in Black's area.
This is worth a couple of points.  Living in Black's area is worth more than 30.
Again, you can ignore Black.  As long as you keep your stones around here connected, you don't have to worry.  You aren't going to get many points around here anyway.
Now you've lost.
You should save this one and try to be sneaky.  It's a long shot, but if you play at A and B and Black ignores you, then you have a snapback.
This costs Black a point.
This is worth nothing.  Black will eventually have to play A10 no matter what happens.
You don't need to play here. Since the white group has an eye and the black group doesn't, he'll never be able to put you in atari.  This cost you a point.
This isn't a threat - Black can't play H19.
Costs another point.
You don't need this move.  Your group is safe.
Black's paranoia costs him two more points.
MK: I'd never seen this opening before. In retrospect I think that playing the same move on the bottom side might have been better.  G: White's opening against 4H stones can be almost anything, this answer is as good as anything I reckon.
Now, it's hard to say that this is wrong, but I would always use the handicap stones for attack, so I would always play a pincer here...
MK: I think this was probably a mistake. I wanted to divide his two stones, but I ultimately end up losing the dividing stone anyhow.  G: This reflects your relative skill levels, this stone shouldn't be lost :) To me this move is ok.
G: I prefer triangle - this would allow you to invade his 3 point extension later at A
G: This I think is wrong ... I would block the other way and build strength to attack his center.
MK: It didn't occur to me until I went back through the game that this move was a mistake -- if I had played N4 I think I could have kept some pressure on the bottom right group instead of losing them to the ladder-breaker.  G: Yes - this is not so nice. N4 is possible, but feels a bit small, how about M2 aiming at either p2 or h3 later? Or a move at the top.
MK: I'm trying to learn when I should make plays for territory and when I should make plays for influence. My intent here was to trade a bit of the corner for influence in the middle, but I have no idea if it was a good idea.  G: This I dont like - you have so many ways into the center, this is worthless for influence. C15is much nicer, strengthens your corner after the long "extension" to H17 and secures some territory.
G: Again, I would play for territory, play C15!
MK: Should I have played this at D15 to prevent the cut that comes later?  G: No - I think this is correct. The cut later is not so bad.
G: I dont like this - the 3 stones were not very useful, and do not deserver this much effort to save them, instead, build strenght against the lone stone at k17 and let him have these. See variation.
MK: This was bad for me.
MK: This is one of my obvious tactical mistakes -- I didn't recognize that this group was unrescuable until i'd wasted a few stones on it.  G: it would be rescuable still, it can run into the center, where it could connect to a number of your other groups. BUT at terrible cost :)   Instead, you can gain a lot by threatening white's cutting stones and giving up the ugly lump of stones at e14.
G: this sets up the crane's nest tesuji [1] - black has to move at one of the triangled spaces if he wants to save the stones.  [1] http://senseis.xmp.net/?CranesNestTesuji
G: I see that you want to attack K17, but it is already very weak. Attach from a distance, this is too close.
G: This is unfortunate, now all of white's side is one group. BUT this was probably not the largest move on the board at the moment. Make white pay by taking some profit now! See variations.
MK: P4 would have worked better -- I really don't know what I thought I was doing with this move.  G: These things happen :) But note later that this is where you later let him into the center - in fact, this is "the game losing move" :)
G: I feel this is a bit weak of white. Do not fear the KO!
MK: I'm not sure at all whether this was a good move. My intent was to offer two threats -- either I connect this stone to my thick group on the right and get a lot of strength in the middle or I connect to the left and give support to my weak stones.  G: I am sorry, but this does nothing. Any triangled move is better. The game is very quite just here. No weak groups=no real action. Grab some territory and assume your extra stones means you will come out with more.
G: this is also a weak reply, the good black moves from last time still stand.
MK: Is this too agressive? At the time I felt that I had a good chance to kill the F3 stone and secure a big corner.  GAG: I think this is move is good, but the timing is off. Earlier I would have liked it a lot.  Locally, I think pushing from your corner, threatening this move is much bigger (variation) - but really I think D8 is too high and you should creep under.
MK: This was a mistake, I think; if I had played H2 and let white have the stone at H4 I might have been able to kill the two inside stones.  G: I dont like H2, I still would prefer protecting your corner while threatening H2.
G: odd move by white, h2 is much safer.
MK: Given that the white group ended up living, I think it might have been better for me to take this trade.  G: You mean C1 group for H2 group? I think you gain from having h2 later though.
G: the center is already lost, if you want to play here it must be to build a huge territory around RHS, and then I think m8 may be better. OR protect the corner at r17
MK: At the time I thought this was terribly clever, and my opponent even congratulated me after the game for seeing it, but looking at it now I'm pretty sure that there's no way to save the three stones below if white cuts at C4 on the next move.  G: you are right - but i think white does the right thing by attacking the huge black right/top territory instead.
MK: This double-hane move is something I just learned, and I'm still learning when it's a good idea. In this case I thought that the M17 stone would help contain the ponnuki that forms during the joseki, but I think I badly underestimated how much support the K17 stone would offer.  G: I think the outside wall you get from the "standard" joseki works so well with your large RHS here that there is no other choice.
G: This gains little, extend along the LHS!
MK: Would it have been better to give up the two stones on top to prevent the invasion? To be honest, the invasion didn't even occur to me as a possibility until he'd done it, but I feel like that side was open enough that he would have gotten something in there in any case.  G: I think that his invasion shouldn't live anyway, so taking the corner as well is oK :)
G: You have walls all around, dont make his life easy, take away his eye.
MK: All of those cutting points on the left really hurt me here, any ideas how I should have played to avoid that?  G: It's not so bad I think - you can take some cuts, give up on G14 if nescessary.
G: This is weird by white, if black takes J9 his whole position collapses.
MK: My thinking here was that I should use the ko to steal a few points somewhere. L18 was a stupid place to try to take those points; I think I could have killed the invading group if I had played right.  G: From here on it all goes wrong for black :)   At first I thought white made a mistake in starting the KO fight now, but see variation (maybe you already read this out)
MK: This is simply a misread; I forgot that the M16 stones were in atari.  G: Oh well.
Since white kindly left you alone in the bottom right, I would save the situation with S3 or similar.
MK: Ultimately I did end up killing the three stones, but given that I could have taken out the invading group this was pretty clearly a bad exchange for me.
MK: Since I've already been so badly reduced I felt that my only chance was to reduce white's territory as much as possible before he had a chance to secure it.  G: Indeed - however, this is not the way - again, creep in along the sides! Now it's also end-game time and really time to consider what is sente. S3 for instance is sente, and there is no way white can afford to not answer.
Good! At last! :)
MK: Another misread -- simply because of the name, I am far too fond of monkey jumping.
MK: I think this must have been a mistake -- can you think of a reason he might have wanted to do this?  G: No - it's a mistake.
MK: This would have worked if he hadn't played A3 first, I think.
MK: At the time I thought this was a really neat idea -- a double monkey-jump! If the R4 group wasn't so weak, I think it would even have worked...
MK: I think this was a mistake -- T6 kills, doesn't it? (variation)  G: I explored a few variations - I dont think white can kills (My I dont play so often any more and I could be rusty and get it wrong :)
G: Ouch. Giving up g18 is probably better, since you save the corner. See variation.
MK: you can tell I'm not used to games getting as complicated as this: I didn't realize this was a wasted move until I'd already played it.  G: By now you could probably have estimated the score and seen that you are losing as well. It is much easier than you think :)   This is the last comment!
ES: Solid opening.
ES:  Odd, but valid move, indicates that white wants to fight.  A, B, or C is more common, working to secure a base.
ES: A is more common.  With black's stone at B, I think this can be cut, see variations.
ES: A was good technique by black. White's move in response is very aggressive.
ES: Very small, suggest A instead.  A forces a response by black at B, then white is strong on the outside and black has a small corner.
Peter: Is move 16 ok here or is one of the triangle better?  ES: I like the move you made.  See variations
Peter: Is 17 at A not better for development?  ES:  Yes, I like A very much, huge for black.
Peter: I doubt if i should play on C, A or B instead. But I was afraid of isolating the marked stone.  ES: C is important to give any value to the stone D.  A is OK too.  your hoshi stone in the bottom left is fine.
Peter: What to do here? I would like to play C, but then the square marked stone could get under attack?  ES: This is a big fight in the making.  D would have been the commn response to E.  F-G is a very small base, it will need an entension to the middle to live.  Better to play C before G.  H was the problem play that started the big fight.
ES: Small, A or B is better.
ES: Bad gote attack by black.  Forces A which forces B.  While it is a nice wall of black, there are bigger plays...
ES: Excellent, larger corner for white.  Now A or B is huge.
ES: Maybe consider A?  But your play is good to give the B-D group a chance at life.
ES: A is better.  Extend to middle.
ES: Secures LARGE Area for black at top, given the nature of this game, I might have played A to make the small white group fight for life.
ES: Very good!
ES: Very weak
Peter: Was this wise?  ES: I prefer "foolhardy".  What will white do if black plays A or B?  See variations.
ES: This move is worth two points, VERY small.
Peter: Is A better?  ES: A is MUCH MUCH better.
ES: White now has three groups at A, B,& C that must all fight for life.  Do not be afraid to let some stones die.
Peter: This felt good but i don't know if that feeling was correct. Other good points (triangle)?  ES:  You are correct for responding locally, the A group still does not have a base.  B, as you have suggested may be good, forces C then D, so is gote.  I like your suggestion of E best, as it threatens to connect with the group at F.
ES: Ouch, the hammer falls.
ES: Balck did not see the reson for playing A...  Should have cut at B, very urgent.  See variation.
Peter: Didn't know what else to do.  ES: Secure at A, Cut at B.  See variations.
Peter: It was better to attack at A  ES: Yes.  Play more slowly?
ES: Too early.  Not reallu a weakness for black, helps make white stronger with response.
ES: Consider double hane to A instead.
ES, better to cut-off balck and connect the group than try to save everything.
ES: Too late the hane cannot be cut, A & B are miai
ES: B threatened white to play A.
ES: A is better.
ES: Very good.
Peter: could i have played 76 at 77 and still rescue the marked stones?  ES: I do not see that the white stones can be saved at all.  Black is so far ahead right now, 30-40 points.  White needs to save the marked group to have any chance, reducing the black center/left side territory and white must create territory in the center.  Yo did a remarkable job to save those stones and accomplish all of the goals.
ES: HUGE mistake by black.  Possibly the one move the loses the game.
ES: Good move, threatens the possibility of two eyes..  See variations
ES: Tiny
ES: Good move by black.
ES: This move lets white live.  See previous variation.
ES: Very good. LIFE!
ES: Very good.
Peter: Was A better?  ES: Yes, clearly.
ES: Now a big weakness at A.
ES: A is big.
ES:  Now White is ahead, perhaps as much as 20 points.  White can afford to be very conservative and secure while reducing black's territory.
ES: Good, weakness removed.
ES:  I understand that you are concerened about life and death between A and B groups.  Count the liberties.  Prior to white's play, black has three, and white has four.  With an eye toward being conservative, I revise my opinion of your play in this area higher.
ES: Very good, punish black for not responding to A
ES: solid engame plays
ES: not worth playing.
ES: Look at A.
ES: Too defensive, but OK given you are ahead.
ES: Not needed, costs white one point.
Peter: I had better played A or B?  ES: Your move forces C, then you can play A.  My rule of thumb, a forcing one pint move is the same value as a two point move.
ES: If you are playing in a live game, some people like dame filled in like that, but A forces B, then C creates an eye.  One eye beats no eyes...  Black group D cannot live.  See variation.
ES: Still, white group is OK.  If black plays A then white plays B.  Black group is threatened once black plays B.
I think this was too submissive; I've included one possible  variation with a more dynamic move.
H.: Was my opening okay so far or did I fall behind? I'm  really not sure how to judge it and would be happy about  some principles. Your opening was pretty good, but a thing both  less-experienced players tend to do is play joseki not quite  in conjunction with each other. These last few moves not  only created a group with too small of a base, but also do  not form a great relationship with the marked stone. I think the only reason this joseki turned out so badly for  you was because of the trade of the triangle-marked  stones. You had to defend the cut, but you also need to play at A  or B.
H.: This shimari seems to try to raise the value of R9. I feel  it is too close to my thickness and too far from the upper  corner, but if I want to prove it, I feel like having to invade  now. Was this correct or should I have played differently?  Because ... well, I had a feeling of just barely getting away  in the ensuing fight ...
Your idea was right, but I think the fight was so hard for  you because your invasion was too close to black's  group; A seems better. I included a few variations to show that an invasion A  seems best.
This cannot be played; A must be. Either way, white will  have trouble profiting. This move allow black to surround white and nullify  white's influence near the center.
I think A is better since you get more of a profit.
You must block at A; otherwise, you'll allow black to  attack your large group even more.
Odd move; its aji-keshi.
H.: So I am free. But what is my actual profit? I was able  to split the top and keep it confined, alright, and if I could  miraculously get some stones into the center, I even might  pull out N13, but if black strengthens there right now, I'm  not sure what all my thickness will be good for. From this fight you profited little other than a living group.  Also, you had the right idea again connecting, but A  would be better.
H.: So he wants to keep me to nothing. If I ever get a  chance to attack, it's now. I try to do it in a way which  separates the upper right center from D9.
Very good strategy!
H.: Here I thought: Why connect passively, if I can finally  take some profit? But ... well, this cut will break my neck  later. Actually what does that is a bad move following a bit  after that cut, but it all seemed to start here, him getting  his weak stones spread ...
Good!
H.: Here I felt grateful. You're right in assuming that you need to seperate  his group, but you can't expect to win a direct fight in his  sphere of influence. Instead, you need to push to create  weaknesses. I included one example for the first move,  and a few subvariations.
H.: But now the feeling already vanished, because I saw,  that my stones first had to get away, and blacks weak  stones would strengthen on their account. There is that  weakness around G9, but I saw no way of exploiting it  without helping him.
Much too slow, at least a one-space jump at A is  necessary at A.
At this point, your idea of G9 would probably be good  since there's really nothing for black to gain now from it,  or perhaps something risky. It's always fun to experiment!
Ahh...just barely missed the tesuji :(
Making life in this way; creating an eye by playing an  empty triangle cannot be good for white.
H.: I just barely got away myself. At least he is cut off and  still without eyes. And now I wished I had connected  back then ... I could of course connect now or cut at L5,  but I felt that black would then just build around the lonely  E8 stone and live.
H.: Okay, here I could have finally connected. But then I  thought he might exploit the still flimsy shape around E8  and get a second eye there after taking L4. That would  have been my defeat, since I'm behind on actual territory.
H.: Okay, so here I made my final blunder. But somehow  the whole fight was hard for me, and I wonder what I  could have done better. Please adjust my strategy, and I  would also be grateful for some recommendations of what  and how to study or what to read. Again, thanks for your time and your help! First of all, I'd like to say it is absolutely amazing that  someone who started just 6 months ago could progress so  much so quickly! Also, as you read through my review, I point out several  mistakes you made. Honestly, I would not dream of seeing  any kyu player spotting some of the more complex  variations. I am just trying to help you keep an eye out for  tesujis (and mine too :) ). Over all, you play was very good, and the few large  blunders you made really cost you. I think, to improve your game, you just need to work more  on improving your fuseki and getting better at fighting. If  you can afford it, I truly recommend Get Strong at the  Opening and Get Strong at Attacking by Richard  Bozulich. If not, whenever you want, perhaps go to  goproblems.com, whih contains over 5000 go problems  over all difficulties and varities. Finally, I'd like to say it was a lot of fun being able to  review this game and good luck with your future games!
hardtowin [1k]: hi
Kosai [2k]: Hi.  Have fun!
This is fine, I only added one variation for black bacause you seemed to be interested in new fuseki ideas.
good!
I would play r6 or r3 here.
This push is unusual.
black played good untill this point. in fact the "joseki" here is slightly better for you.
Kosai [2k]: My thought here was that if W C5 I can C10, and the bottom is still open.  Maybe I should just K16?  I dont like this move.  K16 is not good eather because mormaly you dont want to make a double wing formation like this from a 44 point.
maybe the game is about even at this point.  white has more influence but black has more secure points.
this pincer ist very good for white so maybe m17 was a little questionable
I dont like this move. 1) it is not good shape 2) it attaches to a weak stone, strenthening it. 3) ist does not secure the corner or the right side.   P13 is your fisrt real bad move.
what has black gained from this exchange?
I dont like this.  there is a running fight going on on the right side and black plays tenuki. Black does not need another group now. by the way: the white corner is not easy to secure, so the chance to do something here will last long.
what are u doing here? making live is only the last possiblility, to be used if there are no alternatives.   JUST RUN!
ist that move pair a gain for black? maybe it is ok, but i am not sure.
now black has forced white to  1) make almost 30 points  2) move out comfortly with g9
Kosai [2k]: Maybe P3 instead of Q2, to try to keep sente?  no, q2 is fine!
overplay
w needs to fight here, good  move.
the black sones are moving into a dificult area. this is no good. black should reduce the center in the endgame an not invade it with weak stones.
forcing w to damage the corner, a bad exchange for black.
Kosai [2k]: Maybe R5?  W seems pretty strong.
?? you are wondering about your fuseki, but you did not loose ground there.  s5 is -1 point if you dont have a concrete variation up your sleeve. I guess you must rather practice live and death than joseki and fuseki.
??
this should beter be sente for sure if you play a move like this. Well, it defends agains the o9 cut, but there are bigger endgame moves to do this.
here is my offer: have a close look at the live and death problems in this corner and send me an EMail with an sgf. I will have a look at you analysis then. This is the road to shodan. I could type some variation but you will not learn a lot, if you dont think about the problem here first.
AB: I think just Q6 is good.   FR: what is the proper way for W to answer N3? How about O5?
AB: Not bad, but I would prefer Q6.
AB: I don't like this one very much either. The N3-N6 stones might easiliy come under attack.
AB: Again, I think Q6 is better than Q7, the right side is not safe anyways. You also see that the marked stone at P3 is a little slow. Just imagine you could take that stone away and place it anywhere you like. Would you place it at P3?
AB: Maybe the opening looks a little better for Black, but not in a way that decides a 8-10K game. I would always attack a moyo in the middle, which means in the lower left corner in this game. So something like F5 might be an idea. It would also aim at the weak Black N-stones.   FR: Does the opening really look not so good for W? What to do next?
AB: Not so good, I think. If you want to live a move on the third line is better. Alternatives are B15 or C10, which will give White an easy life.
AB: C13 is ok. Black cannot kill White. C13 also enables White to attack, for example at D8.  FR: C13 now look questionable. Is H13 better?
AB: This move is risky. Now I think H13 is appropriate. Just imagine a Black stone there! Alternatively you could also play F15. The Black corner is not 100% safe.
AB: Looks a little strange as White can still easily invade.
AB: Ok.
AB: No. Biggest mistake so far. You cannot just invade at the bottom and then move somewhere else. And this move is not that big. Still plenty of possibilities for Black there. See variation.
AB: Big trouble now for White. I would say the game is now very good for Black.
AB: Aji keshi. You should leave the situation as it is. If, for example, you play E11 instead, it is sente for capturing with J13. As it is, White robs himself of that possibility without much gain.
AB: Again, not much use here. Also, pushing from behind is usually bad.
AB: Black is ahead and can easily play without taking any risks. Just F17 is fine.  Ut: What would be the best way to attack here ? Should B play into the white goup like e15  ? What about b14 ?
AB: F17 is better. Now there is this cutting point. It kind of looks like a White peeping move without a Black answer. Bad shape.
AB: This move is slack. Black is in no trouble at all. It would be much better to use the strength to attack the single White stone, for example with N17.
AB: The exchange of the previous two stones is clearly good for White.
AB: Another very slack move, completely unnecessary.  FR: Now it's time for W to play aggressively, but where?
AB: White should take the opportunity to take care of the lonesome stone at the bottom. Just imagine a Black move at H4, for example. That would be the end of the game.
AB: Good!
AB: It would be advisable for White to create space towards the left.
AB: Not a bad sequence for White. The Black territory is large, but there are cutting points on the right.
AB: Very strange. Connecting at N7 would be good.
AB: Of course.
AB: Helps Black. See variations.
AB: Again helps Black. Better just make two eyes with J3.
AB: Strange move. Black could probably still live easily on the right. Of course, the game is lost for White. The reason is that there are two White groups which are pityful. Just barely alive with two eyes. White forgot to take care of those groups when there was time. A good example of a game where making your groups live is not everything. The surrounding Black stones have so much more value.
AB: Very riskfree :-). Black could easily go to R3 or R6 even. Or just connect J8 to say "I have won."
AB: What kind of a shape is this?? M16 is much better.
AB: Still unnecessary. If anything, L13 is not bad.
AB: Big!
AB: Black still on the slack road :-).
AB: The sequence is not good for Black, but good enough.
AB: Now it's a little too late for an invasion here. Black cannot first stabilize White with moves like P12, P11, O7, etc. and then invade.
FelisRatus [7k]: Времени добавить? Utgarda [9k]: неа, усе ок =D
AB: It should not be possible. The game is over.  FR: Is it possible to invade lower-left, or it is time to resign?
Utgarda [9k]: это у меня вдохновение, поэтому так быстро играю
AB: I think atari the other way is simpler. See variation.
Xikkuh: tenuki? and play r7? prana: no, f3 is good. r7 and r13 are miai, so no need to hurry.
Xikkuh: and here? prana: c3 is correct. And it is even sente. Thus, you can play r7 anyway if you like.
prana: very slow. B is heavy.
Xikkuh: Is this the right move? prana: I like it. It keeps B busy.
Xikkuh: I think this is a good move prana: It stakes out  a moyo. Nice idea. Alternatively, you can continue attacking by playing around M13
prana: I don't know this move. More obvious (to me) are plays on the marked points.
Xikkuh: don't know if this the right move before atack the black weak group. prana: good  move.
prana: bad shape
prana: wrong direction (push from behind)
Xikkuh: I like this move prana:  Maybe ok, but there is weakness at p10.
prana: b should defend Q16 first
prana: be careful. B is not that weak, and there are cuts in the w position
Xikkuh: Sente for me =) prana: IMHO the exchange wM12 bk13 is good for black. w is very weak outside, b has a cut at p10.
prana: slow
prana: too slow.
Xikkuh: eat?
prana: w is very happy
Xikkuh: I think this move was very good =)
prana: heavy.
prana: bad shape.
prana: ?
Xikkuh: my big mistake of this game =(
Xikkuh: is this good? prana: dangerous, If b gets strong outside
prana: aji keshi
Xikkuh: I think this was good for me cause It gives me more security of my group in the left. prana: see variation before.
prana: wrong direction. B can rescue the cutting stones.
Xikkuh: don't know if this is good or not... maybe playing c8 would be better prana: o5 is too small. I would play w b3.
prana: Complicated. Defending at c13 is easier.
prana: IMHO better simply e5
Xikkuh: very bad move... prana: yes, maybe losing move. After this, the game seems to be dominated by byoyomi.  Thus, I stop analyzing now.
prana: too small. This is aji keshi.
rs220675 [1k]: hi
That move isn't joseki, but how do I punish this move most effectively? My next move will be R4 - is that the best?
Here I was puzzled. Obviously my opponent wanted to play "light". My next move here was at R8. Is that ok or why not and what should I have answered (maybe a little sequence would be nice in this case that I get a feeling for this situation)?
Is that move ok to keep pressure on the white weak group or is it too ineffective? If that's the case: where should I have played instead?  klin: B can be happy with the N6-M5 exchange.
I wanted to isolate the weak white group around N6 and avoid isolation of my own 3 stones around Q8...just as an explanation for this move. Is that strategy ok?
klin: Black P18 should choose R16.
klin: White has saved the R13 group.
Is that move alright or not? Where should I have played? I was anxious to get some territory in exchange for letting white live on the right upper side.  klin: M16 not good.  Black's group is too strong here.  Should play around H16 to attack.
This move seems a bit odd for me. Was it correct and please see the following sequence and tell me if it's ok for black or how it should have gone instead....  klin: H17 is little bit too late.  Should play at the left side, for example C11.
klin: Black got gote here.
This move always bothers me. Because obviously it's a small move, but on the other side I have always fear that white could use the stone at D2 for a deep invasion around H3. Was this move ok or where would have you played?  klin: Apparently, C11 or D11 is still good.
klin: This is bad.  Should F2 connect, and leave something in the corner.
This is the very first time I realized a problem for my black side: White had a big moyo on the left upper side and it seemed there is no real possibility for me to invase there anymore.  klin: White C9 is not as good as D11.
Now this move I consider as a mistake since it will strengthen whites thickness and white will be able to espace with its weak group. I consider a move around F8 better. Am I right? If the move at H7 is indeed ok, then please look at the following sequence and tell me how could I have put more pressure on white or gotten out of this "escape-run" with more advantage.  klin: At this moment, Black should choose between D10 or E10.  C15 is another way to invade.
klin: The black sequence accomplished nothing but help white. No comments after this point.
Can black live there anyhow or at least with Ko and how would be the sequence?
Reem [1k]: mthx
Reem [1k]: are you learning yose?
rs220675 [1k]: no..why do you ask? Reem [1k]: your good in fuseki and yose rs220675 [1k]: hm...ok...
sixrusses [7k]: hello have fun
Gafagarion [8k]: hello good game
Didn't know if it was the right extension here.  NS:  C10 is typical.  A 5 line extension is often considered optimal for speed, because it can not be split comfortably.  O3 playable.
I wanted to attack the weak stone in order to get moyo on the top  NS:  This move is too close.   It is more effective to attack from a distance.  C11, E14 look better to me.
NS:   A rule of thumb is that you should extend when touched, and you are stronger.  When your opponent is stronger, you should hane.  So if you were to follow that rule, you should extend here.
Here i was afraid of D9 as G3 is a ladder breaker so i protected it  NS: I think this move a bit slow.  I'd play something around O3.  I don't think the cut would be too painful at this point.  If I were cut, I'd sacrifice D10 to make a very solid position.
This move was strange I think? No?  NS:  I would have played P3. or P4.  He doesn't want to get split though
Is it the right invasion point? I choose this because this 2 points were miai. I was also thinking about headin for P3 but was too afraid  NS: M3 good.
NS:  I'd consider playing P17 here.  See variation.
NS:  This move is bad.  Must extend to P15, with O17 stone.
here i was pretty happy and was clearly leading  NS:  I don't think you are clearly leading.  I count 54 for b, and 58 for w, though that doesn't take any consideration for the thickness at C9.
NS: Small.  See variations
NS:  Avoid touching weak stones.
NS:  O18 necessary  now.
Its always like this. I'm strong my oppenents invade and I can never avoid it  NS:  Well, it seems like you need work on your contact fighting.   W shouldn't be able to settle so easily.
NS: Good cut
NS:  Wrong direction.  G12 necessary to keep groups separated.
NS:  This stone not important.
My moyo is totally destructed And I don't lead anymore  NS: Yes, your moyo is destroyed, but you got something out of it, including a wall at M13, and a few center facing moves.  You missed the opportunity to attack the K14 group, and perhaps use your influence at C9.
NS: Good tenuki.
NS:  Why not atari?
Here again this two stones should die.
NS: Must stay connected!
And again he reduces me a lot and I gain nothing in exchange
That was an overplay no?  NS:  The R18 group has problems -- see variations... this is fairly complex life and death.  B should at least get seki.
NS:  Nice ko, but filling at T14 gets you a more favorable ko.
NS:  Know that this threat loses you points....
NS: this threat is smaller then the ko.  I'd consider taking.
NS:  How about this instead? (see var)
NS: Unnecessary, keep sente.  A4, R1..
NS:  Very small...
NS:  Should play A4 first.
NS:  Not urgent, A18 better, and about 3 more points.
This maybe wong decision, since i don't have any pincer around A. Would Q14 or so be better response?   dr:I would prefer to play at 1 or 2. w is low at D17 so perhaps 2
dr: you are ok in UR. this is even result
Not knowing standard joseki and instead of attaching a stone on A have helped my opponent secure his corner while atacking me in next move. Would variation be any better?   dr: see the comments in the variation
dr: b is over concentrated compared to w so D12 is not good
I got scared of atack that would steal my base.
dr: this gives w an easy life in corner.  see the thread
dr: b is overconcentrated here.  The extension looks nice but since w is secure in corner, R9 has become weak.  see the thread
As every beginner, I had a serious trouble deciding how to respond here   dr: A also prevents connection.  see the thread.  all the b stones become secure and the w lower right is seriously weakened.  Probably this is an overplay by w since the lower right group is not secure after s8 and s9.  Perhaps w should play around B instead.
So I tried to ensure, he wont connect easily
This was propably mistake, maybe I should treat it as kikashi and simply connect at A and strenghen my position in center while chasing hit group.   dr: yes
Following sequence is a reckless miscalculation on my part.  dr: The thread will give a better result  :-(
Propably better co connect at A and avoid possible kikashi in future
I got scared of losing the whole group. Looking at the game now, maybe I should've try to start some serious fight in lower left area first, since my oponent was far ahead already.
dr: at this point you are way behind so need to do something desparate or resign.  The b groups are all secure so you can attack vigorously and hope for complications and mistakes.  C should give a large sente reduction.  D threatens to cut off some weak stones or give a large reduction.  These are my last comments.
dr: this is slow considering the board situation.  B needs a lot more so see the threads.
I hoped to mistake my oponent to atari me from wrong side, but ended up only strenghening his huge framework
Here I finaly gave up. I should've given up earlier, but kept playing in hopes for some bigger mistake on white side (while making a lot more on mine).
*** DimitriLW *** Somewhat non-traditional placement.  This type of fuseki play is certainly outside of my expertise.  However, I would consider it risky, especially for lowe-rank players like us.
*** DimitriLW *** Now we will see what W planned with the F3 fuseki stone.
*** DimitriLW *** I think the normal D17 would be easier.
*** DimitriLW *** This will not work.  Need to read this out better.
*** DimitriLW *** Easier to just capture.
*** DimitriLW *** Ambitious, but possible.  Personally, I think B could reduce W's top with something easier, like O18.  ...or, B could take this sente opportunity to move somewhere completely different.  A stone in the general vicinity of W's weak two stones could result in opportunity for B while simultaneously giving a base from which to push into the center and reduce W's area
*** DimitriLW *** Right now, it appears that B has solid life.  Perhaps this stone would be more useful elsewhere.  Some general possibilities are marked.
*** DimitriLW *** Weak.  H15 works.  If B cuts at G16, just push him back into your D16 group.  ...or, if you are concerned about the cut, then consider playing G16 immediately.  After all, after B plays H15, you will play G16 anyway.    Imagine this: if you played G16, then B played H15, would you play G15 next or something else?  This thinking shows how small G15 is in comparison to other areas (previously marked).  ...essentially, what this stone says is "please play H15, it is a free play fo you.
*** DimitriLW *** This feels like a reach, which could allow B to develop some cuts in the future and/or build life underneath it by threatening cuts from the inside.
*** DimitriLW *** W appears to concede the marked region for now instead of fighting for it.  What will happen first: W closing in the points with a stone at B8, or B destroying them for good..?
*** DimitriLW *** From my last comment up to now, the exchange just seems slow.
*** DimitriLW *** At this point, B needs to notice that the center is nearly enclosed.  It is critical that B get feelers probing into that area, such as via using the top group to stretch into the center and destroy W's territory.
*** DimitriLW *** This will not secure the center.  I am uncertain what the goal of this stone is, but the result is much like passing.
*** DimitriLW *** ??  Huh??  Just play J13 to enclose the center.
*** DimitriLW *** ?? Huh?  Not necessary.  This stone is equal to a pass.
*** DimitriLW *** Bigger plays available.
*** DimitriLW *** I believe E1 works.  But I can understand the desire to simply play safe.  After all, W appears to be sizably ahead right now.
*** DimitriLW *** This stone is equivalent to a pass.
*** DimitriLW *** This will not work, so B is just giving away a ko threat, should a ko develop before the end of the game.
*** DimitriLW *** Wasted ko threat.
*** DimitriLW *** Wasted stone.  Equivalent to a pass.
*** DimitriLW *** B is filling in his own territory.
*** DimitriLW *** R19 better, locally.  However, playing elsewhere (e.g., A8) even better.
*** DimitriLW *** No.  B should still die, but this would be better at B12 to push B into your wall.
*** DimitriLW *** No.  W is trying to give life to B.  If you want to kill the eye space, then play B14 instead.  This stone will be captured by a B stone at B14.
*** DimitriLW *** Oops.  Final mistake of the game.  W just allowed B to make two eyes, thus turning a dead group into a living one, and giving the game to B.  Final comment of the review.
XCM: This is not important. Playing the bulge at A is much more vital. See variation.
XCM: At the current stage this move is very small. I believe you should leave it and play elsewhere. See variation.
XCM: This is OK, but maybe you can go out a little further. R10 would look much better undewr these circumstances.
XCM: Not the right way to cut your losses. As you see black plays K17 next in the game and threatend to jeopardise both sides of your territory A and B. See variations.
XCM: Under these circumstances i believe this move is way too small. See variation.
XCM: This sequence makes your area lok SMALL
XCM: This move is a big problem for you. White is confined to the corner. You should have come out when you still had the chance, which is why i said eariler you needed to play D5.
XCM: Much too small. Remember to lok for moves that expand your area and/or reduces that of your opponent.
XCM: Big move. you must defend. Keep an eye out for moves like these.
XCM: VERY big move, you need to take points like these as soon as possible.
Something around A is also typical in this situation
artboy598 [8k]: i don't have that long left, but not trying to rush you
nadroj [8k]: ok sorry nadroj [8k]: i play a little faster np artboy598 [8k]: thx, its not me, its my mom
InsaneWaya [2d]: if u 2 get done soon plz wait, im taking a shower, i'll be back asap, plz read when u r done xD
The black stones are too strong for a meaningful attack so I think its more prudent to play more safely, lower and close to your corner stone. Around H3 Black can jump in the middle of your stones easily, because of his strength in the lower right so you don't want to jump too far
artboy598 [8k]: I see you like to fight! :D
nadroj [8k]: hmm nadroj [8k]: should have done teaching nadroj [8k]: so waya could comment artboy598 [8k]: yeah, but we can wait till after
rgame2011 [22k]: d'mitri
artboy598 [8k]: i thought you'd see that artboy598 [8k]: but I was scared my group would come under attack
InsaneWaya [2d]: fear will only result in a lose
artboy598 [8k]: I hate running battles
artboy598 [8k]: I imagine 2 dragons fightin
nadroj [8k]: haha
they say shape first read later. A isn't very agressive but its stronger and safer
artboy598 [8k]: wild game, isn't it?
nadroj [8k]: hmm yea
too timid, see variation
bad shape
artboy598 [8k]: You have gotten better since the last time we played nadroj [8k]: i guess nadroj [8k]: you too artboy598 [8k]: really, Im not being nice nadroj [8k]: almost had you
artboy598 [8k]: yeah, I was scared
nadroj [8k]: but you dont a have much territory nadroj [8k]: with that group artboy598 [8k]: you either with yours  > Might be better to give up a few stones an take territory
No need to play this, see variation
artboy598 [8k]: good move
nadroj [8k]: waya
nadroj [8k]: is like hurry up nadroj [8k]: lol artboy598 [8k]: ok
artboy598 [8k]: quick end game
nadroj [8k]: i am the one taking the time
artboy598 [8k]: this would have been a great tourney game
nadroj [8k]: i guess
artboy598 [8k]: that's like ur catch phrase
nadroj [8k]: i never played in one artboy598 [8k]: oh
N19 bigger
nadroj [8k]: haha
artboy598 [8k]: its over now
Just tryng a position I never tried before  SC: The 4x4 point (square) and the two 3x4 points (triangles) are all good places to start a corner with.
SC: This is too "high" for the opening.  "High" means closer to the center of the board and "low" means closer to the edge. In general, play your opening moves on either the 3rd line or the 4th line.  Playing roughly half of your opening stones on the 3rd line and half on the 4th line is also a good "rule of thumb".  This stone is too "high" to really control the lower side.  White could invade at any of the squares and should be able to make a live group.  If this stone was at J4, then only the F3 invasion spot would be workable for white.  While this stone doesn't control the lower side, it might be intended to move into the center.  That isn't really a good plan, however.  It is very difficult to make territory in the center of the board. This is because you need to surround all 4 sides, which takes a lot of stones.  It takes a minimum of 4 stones to surround 4 points of territory in a corner.  It takes a minimum of 8 stones to surround 4 points of territory in the center.  This means it takes twice as many moves, which gives white twice as many chances to mess things up.  So, don't waste much time on center territory, focus on the sides and corners.
SC: This is also too high.  Another good idea for the opening is to find the largest gap between two stones and play in that gap.  The gap between the two marked stones is the largest by one intersection.  So a good move for black this turn would be any of the triangles.
SC: This is the end of the opening phase of this game.  The opening involves placing widely spaced stones to "sketch out" areas that each player would like to have for territory.  The middle game involves trying to secure and expand the territory you sketched out in the opening, while trying to reduce and invade your opponent's sketched out territory.  This is when the most attacking and killing of groups happens.  The end game involves filling in the final details of each player's territory.  These phases are not always clearly defined, so it isn't always easy to pick an certain move and say that is when the game moved to the next phase.
SC: What is black's plan at this point?  You should have at least a general plan or goal in mind.  Otherwise you are just reacting to your opponent's moves.   This move looks like black is trying to cut the two marked white stones into seperate groups and/or trying to push into the area around G13.  Neither of the marked white stones is weak.  This means that neither is in any immenent danger of being cut off and killed. So, cutting them apart doesn't accomplish much.  Also, white is not at all close to making real territory around G13.  This would be territory in the middle portion of the board and I have already mentioned how many moves it takes to secure this sort of territory.  So, I think black needs a better plan.  Focus on attacking your opponent's weak groups, or capturing the corners.  Capturing the sides is also OK to work on.  I have marked several possible moves for black.  J3 and R9 work to secure the bottom and right sides respectively. These are rather passive, defensive moves.  So, these would be best if you think you already have more territory than white.  D9 attacks the white stone at E9.  The reason this is better than the actual move you made is that D9 also starts securing the left side.  D17 and D16 invade the upper left corner.  They take advantage of white playing his opening move too far from the corner to really control it.  The 4 triangles near H16 invade the top side.
SC: This is a contact fight.  Contact means the stones are touching the opponent's stones.  A contact fight isn't always about killing your opponent.  You can often gain more by threatening to kill you oppoent's stones, then build up nice strong walls while your opponent scrambles to defend his stones.  In a contact fight, try to keep your stones in a few larger groups, rather than lots of little groups.  Counting liberties is very important in contact fights.  You want to increase your liberties and reduce your opponent's liberties. Before this move, black had a single stone group at G9 with 4 liberties.  Now black has a 2 stone group, but it still has 4 liberties.  If black played this move at F8 instead, then all 3 of black's stones would be more connected and black would have more liberties.
SC: This is still too high, too far from the side.  It may look like the marked stones control the area outlined, but they don't. There is too much room for white to invade and make a live group.  Black would be much more secure if these stones were at R9 and Q13 instead.  These locations would fit with the opening rules of thumb I mentioned earlier.
SC: White invades, taking advantage of black's "high" stones. Now, white needs to either connect to the white stone in the top right corner, or make two eyes on the right side.  Since black can only work on preventing one of these two options per turn, white should be able to accomplish one of these  Black can choose which of those two options white does, however. So, black should decide which way he prefers white to go.
SC:  See the two variations that start on this move.
SC: This makes 3 seperate black groups of 1 stone each.  One important concept here is that contact fights are not usually about killing your opponent.  Contact fights are usually best for building up your strength while threatening and harassing your opponent.  Another important concept here is that I don't think White can be killed even if black tries.  There is enough room between black's 5th line stones and the side for white to live.   So, black should not be trying to kill white.  Once you get the idea of killing white out of your mind, you can focus on what you can do.  I think the marked stone is doomed, but it can still be useful. See the variation.
SC: Playing right next to white is not the best way to surround white.  Playing one space away is often better.  See Variation.
SC: Good, this puts two different white groups in Atari.  White can only save one group, but white does get to pick which group to save.
SC:  No, don't treaten to capture white, then let him off the hook.  You are trying to save one black stone, but letting 2 white stones escape in exchange.  I suspect this move was made with black focusing too much on saving every stone.  You will never save all of your stones, so don't get too focused on trying.  You want to make the best move on the whole board, not just the best move within 2 inches of white's last move.  See the Variations.
SC: Currently, in this contact fight, black has 6 groups of stones with none larger than 2 stones.  White has 3 groups of stones with the largest of 4 stones.  The most liberties any group has is 3.  This many small groups is a recipe for disaster for black.  Black should start thinking about ways to connect stones and increase liberties.
SC: See variation.
I know.. the empty triangle is a bad shape.. but how to save those two stones? Better to consider them lost?  SC: Consider them dead, but still see if you can use them.  See variation.  If you are about to make an empty triangle, stop and look all around for a better move. There will almost always be one. About the only time making an empty triangle is good is when you are making eyes to secure a surrounded group of stones.
SC: Black still has 6 groups and white still has only 3 groups.
SC: Black should see that the ladder won't work at this point and move on to something else.
Here I realized that I the ladder was broken.  SC: You should be able to read out a ladder before you waste this many stones on something that won't work.
SC: The square is better.  Playing the square makes more room for eyes.  Trying to save one stone and losing the whole group isn't a good trade.
SC: Pick one group and stay with it until it is secure and alive. Trying to save more than one weak group at a time usually means you don't save any.   The square is still the best move locally.  The black group around N13 wil be very hard to save even is black focuses on just that group.  It has nothing that looks like an eye at this point. The black group against the right side has one eye around R14, so it only needs one more to live.  See Variation.
SC: White is blocking black without playing in contact.   This usually works better than contact plays.
SC: White is still blocking black well
SC: This long chain of black stones still has no eyes.  This means it is no better off than it was at move 53, so the last 3 black stones have done nothing useful
SC: Letting white play here first is bad for black.
SC: This accomplishes nothing.  See Variation
SC: Play this move at T10 so white can't connect to his stone at T9.  See variation.
this move was a surprise...  SC: White doesn't want black to be able to play on T8.  However, white can just capture at T10 and have two eyes.
it was better to play Q9?  SC: I would play at R8.  One way to choose your move is to find the point your opponent would most like to play, and play there first yourself.  See Variation.
SC: This looks too much like making an empty triangle.  I think Q8 is better.  See variation.
SC: Play on S19 so your corner group will live.  No matter what you do around T8, white can always capture and T10 and live.
SC: Good.
I think this was useless.  SC: I agree.  Playing at Q8 catches two white stones in a ladder that works for black.  See Variation.
SC: White doesn't need to connect here.
SC: Black doesn't need to play in this corner until white has played on either R19 or R 17.  D17 is still good, although the large white wall at L16 means that a black invastion at D17 would get just the upper left corner, rather then the corner and part of the upper side.
SC: Black can still do the ladder at Q8.
SC: Now the ladder doesn't work for black.
SC: Try to run towards your own strong stones.  The square runs towards your stone at J5
SC: Before this move, the one stone group at L10 had 4 liberties. Now it is a 2 stone group, but it still has 4 liberties.  So this move doesn't accomplish much.  L7 is still good. So is D17
SC: Playing on either square will connect black's stones.  So black doesn't need to play on either spot until right after white plays on one.  See Variation
SC: Just capture at G3.
SC: Capture at G3
SC: Empty triangles are bad.  See Variation.
SC: See Variation
At this point I surrendered. I think I've made too many mistakes. Most af them avoidable even for a novice player as me. Do you have any suggestion? Thanks again.  SC: I don't think the game is lost yet.  The marked white stones need to make 2 eyes.  If black plays on J5 before white does, then the white stones have only one eye and will need to make a second eye to live.  Black doesn't have any weak stones, so there is nothing white can attack.  I continued the game as an example.
SC: This is the key point.  If white plays here, then he has two eyes and only the marked white stones would be dead.  Black would be losing, but still might win with an invastion at D17.
SC: White starts to make an eye at L4.
SC: This is where white would like to play next, so black plays here first.
SC: Black needs connect the marked stone to the group around H3.
SC: White will need to play M1 before playing atari at L1.
SC: Don't let white run into the corner and make an eye.
SC: It may be hard to see, but white is dead.   This means that black controls the lower half of the board.  White has most of the upper half, but the large number of dead white stones puts black ahead.  Black could still invade at D17, but you don't need to do risky things like that when you are winning.  Now the end game would start. Probably white's best endgame move would be D17 just to make sure black can't invade.  Black could then play C9 and go from there.  Don't play contact when trying to surround something.  Play about 1 space away.  If you do end up in a contact fight, don't make lots of little groups of stones.  If you have more than one weak group, focus on saving only one at a time.  Usually start with the easiest group to save first.  Don't try to save every stone.  Look for the best move on the whole board, not the best move locally.  Empty triangles are bad unless you are making eyes.
I honestly didn't know what to do with an attachment. My thought was to get thickness at E 16 and make a base. Was that correct?  I guess it's alright, but not great you might have played c17 instead
White got the corner for free, if you compare to the 3 3 invasion white is better off, so something went wrong (see my alternative move before)
Good move here
At this point I am thoroughly confused and maybe a little overconfident.
Never allow hane at the head of two. This weakness will hurt you later on (after looking through the game I can see that it did)
I played a pincer to solidify my claim on the top center, I honestly didn't expect him to play there, should I have played elsewhere?  It is ok, but keeping him out of the corner is a good idea so he has to struggle for life while you can take profit.
this is weak by white
I feel like I should have been able to kill this stone, he can't make a base from there easily
Mistake number one. In retrospect, I should have capped at H 15 or H 16 shouldn't I?  This is completely wrong. You never attach a weak stone it makes your opponent fix his position.
Now the stone is not weak anymore (but your group around e16 is)
I don't know why I did this from this side. I guess I realized that playing at J 15 would put me in double atari if he answered right ans just wanted to assure the group to the lef of a base, of course, the group to the right is in more trouble now.
Suddenly I realize that he has stolen my side, my whole side, again, all variations are appreciated.
I don't think I've ever had someone respond that way.  this is quite normal when white is strong around
I try to hem him in, away from his stones in the middle.
At this point, I let him steal the territory out from under me by connecting under, I lived but lost a corner I thought was secure; all variations are helpful because frankly, this guy was just better than me this day  You are fine here white hardly got anything on the right side
terribly small white should ignore
good
why this move?!
problem here is that your two stones are weak, you should have protected them earlier
not good you have to run now
you are too weak here to try and surround your opponent. you can be cut anywhere
this is an empty triangle. ALWAYS to be avoided It lacks liberties and does not get you very far
white gets all the big points
this is no good as it makes white fortify his position
now you are running from behind
this shape just asks to be cut!
now here you are rather strong so fight!  (white overplayed here)
this is running to the wrong direction, no need to follow!
this is hardly ever good because there are no good followups
connecting much better than living in gote
not neccessary
dead
this is a ko threat and therefore left for ko, white does not have a move there, so the atari just helps white
Desperate attack
Alcibaides [13k]: thanks for the game   The way the stones were placed in the beginning I thought I was going to win. I was very surprised around move 115 when I realized how badly it was going. He wanted to fight, I was fighting well. He was managing to twist my position and get just enough to live ugly and reduce my position. I'm facing more of these guys but he is the best. If you could help me focus globally on proper reactions and locally on battle tactics for overplayed positions, I would appreciate it.  I think your problems are very local. You need to learn about good shape.   You should read this article http://senseis.xmp.net/?path=GoProverbs&page=HaneAtTheHeadOfTwoStones  and  http://senseis.xmp.net/?PushingFromBehind  Those two should help a great deal with you choice of moves. Move 108 for example if a move that leads to pushing from behind. Move 14 as well left a weakness that cost you a lot later on even though it looks alright earlier.  I think a lot can be said about any game but I think but just avoiding a simple mistake you did quite a couple of times in this game will make you stronger. Then you can come back for a review that is more about direction.  Hope this helped a bit. Fabian (Gonuts on KGS if you have any questions)
JS: First of all, this move by White is a little bit strange. I also haven't seen it. So the first thing one should always consider in a local position is: Has the opponent severe followups, or can you tenuki to play somewhere else. Mostly strange moves look strong at the first point, but they lack a followup, so in a lot of positions it is good to just tenuki and play somwhere else.  However, I have found a transposition from another hoshi tenuki joseki.
i had no idea who to play in this corner, but it seems to me that the result is better for white, no ?  JS: Yes the result seems a little bit better for White, look at variation
JS: Here black again helped white makeing a strong position on the outside, look at variation
Is this move necesary ? I think i didn't use it at all next  JS: This move is a good chance for black to become a little bit more active. Usually splitting not so strong groups of the opponent is a good way to forestall big frameworks by the opponent.
A bit too far ?  JS: Beside extending your cutting stone it is very important to know where the important and big parts of the board are.  Just look at the marked white wall and the two black marked stones. If white makes an extension around where you have played this move, black could always slip inside this territory around A. So it is not important for white to play there. Therefore this is also a reason for Black not to play there. If something is not important for your opponent, you are in no hurry to get it!
I wanted to be able to connect to my c16 stone if needed, but now i wonder maybe it's too slow  JS: The last few moves played not good, just strengthening black all over the left side. What is important now is to feel the balance of the acual position. Black has roughly 3 1/2 corners and is ahead in terms of fix territory, but the influence of white should should not be underestimated. So instead of increasing the territory black should think about softly earasing what might could become a big white moyo.  Note that this move is on the second line. This seems like you make an excuse to you opponent.
JS: This worked out quite good for black. You have a strong group on the outside, and your opponent still has to worry
JS: good move by black.
JS: Now black has a clear lead of about 15 - 20 points on the board I guess.
ooops didn't see this :)
JS: Now the game is about even
zdli2002 [2d]: I have to go, sorry Buster [1d]: well, thx anyway  My opponent had to go, so he resigned here. However, even now i can't find a good answer to his last move.  JS: I think, that if you connect all your stones with the (ugly :-)) empty triangly at A, you should have no problems to live. I think that just now the score is very even.  So I hope my review helped you. See you on KGS :-).
H.: Probably this is where it all started. White had entered my framework, but acting seemed to have become much too easy for him, being out with all of his groups. I wanted my local advantage, and since O5 was so gote I just ... well, so I started the mess.
this looks like a plausible move, but I prefer m16.
Ouch!   b weakens his own group in gote! Anny other answer in the corner is better. Generaly try NOT to push opponent stones agains own weak stones. (you repeat that on the upper side as well, later.)
bad move
The fact that w can connect his groups now makes the attack on him les interesting. So s5 did a big damage to b.
just another group to defend.
H.: Only providence can decide this battle.  was heißt denn providence??
real bad move! starts the loosing sequence. w should not atari if he cant capture.
wrong order.
good! black knows which stones matter. The game is won now.
H.: So I finally got out of this advantageous, but to my feeling it seemed like a coincidence. Both of us were trying to handle stuff which was probably just too much for our strength.  But the fighting is far from over, now the mutual killing starts ...  Actually the fighting should be over, black should win easy now. However the problem is, that black keeps on playing complicated moves all the time instead of winning the game.
is this move as big as e13??
this looks like moving dead stones. I prefer to use them in another way
why push white into the black corner?
small
big threat, but bad threat, just answer it.
omg  black forgets that he has alredy won and wants to fight!
w can even tenuke s9, great win for w!
b looses lots of Ko threats now.
black is loosing tons of Ko threats now. Why?
good tenuki. Black at last sees that b11 is small.
but w does not notice that this ko is small.
game over.
I figured to try a 3-3 invasion on each corner woudl be a silly thing to do so I done this with the aim of expanding left  >>If Black answers correctly at 3-3 Invasion in handicap games  gains a strong influence at centre. White o3 it's Ok
I was not too sure how to answer this Iwas thinking o2 but this seemed too slow to me  >>Black with this move try to close the corner with a unconventional kakari.
> This is an excellent answer.
>> this is another strange move. Usually play a contact stone help the opponent to get strong shape.
this is a solid way to play.
white play the kakari in the right up corner.
mistake
another a error... black loose the aji.
Here is when I started wondering when woudl be an oppurtunity to go back to the r14 stone, I felt I could not ignore here the bottom though  >> Yes Black could play A B or C, or something else in the top right corner. I show some possible Joseki.
>> White it's very strong after the capture of the 2 stones. He has to play tenuki (elsewhere).
kenjiro43 [19k]: ?  >> this is a very small move.
HEre I was expecting black to play 01
I thought now is my chance to swap up to the top, since black did not defend here I though I could try to slip under it  >> Finally White play tenuki ! You can invade directly in 3-3, or try a double approach in o17 (or o16).
I figured here is worth more than s16  >>another good move of white.
NOt sure if this by black had to be answered  >>Black have a big weakness in the bottom, maybe he has to play nearer this corner...
>> this cut is strange. I'm not sure it's a bad move, but i think that if you cut p15, you have to continue the action in o16
Trying the same attack each time would case issues I thought and I had to stop black buildign up around here, so on the d line I figured was ok since I can go left or to the centre without too much difficulty  >> Yes! D7 it's a light move can easily jumps at center or extends in d10 for example.
>>too near, see the variation in c10.
This hurt, again was unsure how to answer  >> Black have big weakness in the shape. White have to attach the group in the bottom. P3 it's a Huge move!
white have the attack in p3 again.
I fully intended not to save p16, I was that balck must seperate it anyway  >> Normally save 2 stones in gote it's a mistake, but this maybe it's sente!  If white connect and black play a big point elsewhere there is some dangers for black in the corner...
this move of Blank renforce White. White extend and after Black the 2 stones in (B) cut off.
this a mistake. W have to extend the stone in Atari (A).
>>now white pay to not have play p3 before. C17 it's important now... But W. leave 2 stones for the endgame at B that have settle a big corner in bottom right.
>> now W leave small in the corner. Play a force move (Kikashi) is a free move that can create risks, cutting white stones.
white live small.
white can now build a moyo in the center.  It's a good moment to observe the situation. there is a critic situation in the top. If W play first in the corner can gain the points to take the lead.
>> better 'A' for close big moyo in centre.
now W can kill in the corner.
here I felt maybe t 15 then I had a chance to kill blacks 6 shape but that black cutting stone I thought was more urgent at teh time  >> White lose big opportunity to win the game. I show in variation 'cause it's no urgent defend the cut.
I added a variation here that I though was maybe better in hind sight, would this variation be possible?, turns out the variation not so good, but I do not know how to delet from the sgf, so please ignore it :s
I thought better to keep sente here than to get that extra point
>> a move as a4 are  goods endgame moves in sente.
here I could not see sente move anywhere so saw no problem givin it up, but wouldo8 have been better?  >> Now there are not sente move. The game it's near end.  Attention! p7 it's cuttable. see variation.
FR:   What is the proper local responce to C13? A (E16) looks slow to me, so in the game I played B. Is it OK? What do you think about variation, starting from C?  A: You are right, A looks a little slowish. Most professionals so far preferred D. One possible development is shown in the variation. E is also chosen sometimes. No professional player ever played B in an official game. As the variation starting from C is concerned, I inserted my comments in it.
FR:  If I will play B (s12), it looks like begining of a running battle (variation). I wasn't sure about starting it (but now it looks attractive for black), so I played solidly (A).  A: B is almost inevitable, as it tries to deprive white of a base.
FR:  Again, i dont know, where to play now. Is  approaching  D4 better at A or B better?  A: I would prefer playing at A, as it puts immediate pressure on white and attacks from the more open side.
FR:  F3 brings first problem of the game. Was solid extension at G3 better?  A: It is more secure, but less active. I would also have chosen F3.
FR:  I'm not sure about countering H3. In the game I played A (F5). Is it ok? Whasn't B or C better in this situation?  A: I think that A is o.k. You are fighting against 2 against five, so it is appropriate to treat one of your stones lightly.
FR:  Is A (D6) ok, or better to get base with B (D2)?  A: A is much better. You did well! Attack is the best means of defense and with your move, you attack the corner and solidify your stones in the process, gaining outside influence.
FR:  Are there better local moves?  A: I do not see any. Like that, you minimize your opponents space, which is the proper thing to do.
FR:  Again, is it proper direction of play? I also considered A-D moves. What can you say about my choice?  A: I would prefer E, but as white will have to answer your move, it cannot be bad as long as you keep sente.
FR:  At this moment i was very happy, having territory in the upper-right and central influence, while white have weak group :) I wanted to split white into two weak groups (A in the game). Is it ok? What do you think about normal responce at E17 (variations, starting from B)?  A: You had reason to be happy. So far, you are ahead. The idea to keep the white stones separated is quite correct, especially as you are strong on both sides of them. B ist to passive.
FR: is it overplay? What about leaning atack, starting from A (E15)?
FR:  Mistake?  A: I do not think so.
FR:  Doubtful. But what is better?  A: Seems natural, not doubtful.
FR:  Now I do not know who is attacking. Is running with  A or B, or taking C better?  A: I like D best, because it makes good shape. It is slow, however, but on the other hand I think you will not be able to capture the white stones immediately. So it is best to strengthen your position first and keep the opponent's stones struggling.
A: A bad move, because it strengthens white and deprives you of an opportunity to cut that might come in handy later.  Proverb: "Never strike against the knight's move!" (Unless you can cut...).
A: Unelegant for the same reason. Omit moves like the previous two and you will immediately improve by 4 kyus!
A: A little docile. Instead jump out at A first to gain tempo!
FR:  Alive :)
FR:  But now have some problems with other group. Looks like  black can kill white's corner (variations)? But in the game i missed the chance.  A: Right, the white group cannot live, as you proved in the variations.
FR: Trying to kill...  A: The right spirit!
A: A instead would keep the situation simpler. See variation.
FR:  A (N17) is doubtful. But in the game I was not able to read variation, starting from B (M18). Is it still possible to kill white without ko?  A: As shown in the variation, you cannot get a ko... My idea was: after bringing the triangled stones to life in sente, rescue the squared ones by going for the circled cutting stones!
FR:  The victim killed the hunter :(  A: Not a favourable result :-)
A: The wrong one! See variation.
FR:  Big, but not urgent. Is it better to kill lower-left corner? Or can black attack low-right?  A: Your move makes fine use of your wall, looks pretty alright.
A: Looks out of the way, somehow. I would try A.
FR: misread :(
A: Not interesting for white now. He should cut at A to reduce black's moyo as far as possible...
FR:  Now it's vitally urgent to kill, but i missed it.  A: You did well in capturing the triangled stones, because white handled the situation faultily. Anyhow, you should kill the white corner group.
A: You might rather protect against the cut instead. See variation.
A: Bad, as you fill in your own liberty!
A: Desastrous again! A instead will create a wonderful ko in your favour!
FR:  You can't win a semeai against a group with two eyes.  A: Right you are, definitively.
FR:  I was to overwhelmed to find adequate ko threat.  Now I can see only A (J18), so, probably, i lose this ko.  A: Correct.
A: This is really hard to bear...
A: At least you get some compensation.
here i'm pretty sure black played H16 too early. I was thinking of G16 and leaving k17 alone but thought against it because of what I could lose... I ended up answering this poorly.  I was thinking that it might be better to give up some stones to get out into center and prevent black's thickness rather than attempt to live and give black so much influence towards the center. So maybe A or B may have been better than simply responding to black?  Although I feel B is rather slow it gives me a strong attack at O16/17 later, or that's what I was thinking.  ff - This is a new fuseki introduced by Lee Changho in 2005.  At the professional level, White virtually always answers at H17.  We will see what this is all about as we go along.  In general it can not possibly be good to give up G17 in order to escape into the center at this time.  If it were good then it must be better for White to jump to K15 right away, without playing G17.  Basically White is not unhappy to live along the top side.  It is then up to Black to prove that settling this weak White so early was a good idea...
ff - Normal is J16 as shown in the variation.  This is one alternative.  It is quite rare in professional play but that does not mean it is wrong.  See the variation for the more typical play here...
ff - This is a very aggressive play since there are no supporting White stones anywhere in the area.  It looks like White is trying too hard here = an overplay.  White has to have some help on the outside to play like this.  Here Black holds both the right and the left corners.  There are no stones in the center.  White may have felt that fighting spirit required the cut but if we look at the result, White has created a weak stone without hurting Black.
ff - See the variation for the more common alternative here...
ff - White has no good follow up to this play, so it would be better not to play it now.  Depending on how things develop, White might want to play something else later.
ff - White needs to seek eyes.  This play does not do so.  Better to just slide to E18...
ff - White turns back to the side.  The two White stones above leave some potential to play the hane at G14, but in return Black has greatly increased the outside influence along the left side.
ff - See the variation...
My very bad result for me in my opinion result... Very painful I think there is probably a better way to play this i Believe  ff - The point is that F15 and E15 contribute nothing to White' eye shape.  They strenthen Black.  Better not to have played them at all.  Fundamentally however, the problem was the cut at M16.  It is of no value to White on the outside and left White one play behind on the top side.  Go back to that point in the game and look at the result if White simply plays M18...
ff - This play does not attempt to maintain a connection with the stones at M15.  This declares that they are a mistake.  But that means that they were better not played at all.
ff - It is an interesting question whether White can do better than this.  See the variations.  Fundamentally the play at R15 is played when White has at least the threat to push through at Q15 and cut.  That is not a realistic option here so perhaps something else would have been better.
ff - Is this a good aggressive play or an overplay like M16?  It depends on what White intends here...
ff - Black chooses to fix the defect in his shape...
Although here it may be safer to play R11, I felt that playing low would be too slow to play fight against black's thickness. Here was wondering if the atari would be better rather than the jump. (playing in the numbered sequence instead?)  Just simple yes/no here you do not need to get into too much detail unless there was a better way.  ff - White backs off from the cut at O14 and tries to play it safe.  This makes O14 into an overplay like M16.  It is not clear that it has to be that way.  See the variations...
maybe a better move elsewhere? Perhaps one of the marked moves instead?  ff - This is the most natural play here.
Felt this was wrong side.  ff - With the plays in the upper right, this is an opportunity to play similar to Black on the upper side.  The play from the opposite side, at M3, looks better.  See the variation...
Was considering goint on top but thought it'd be too dangerous. would going on top have been better?  ff - This looks like an overplay but White has some weaknesses in the upper right as well so it is not all one way here.  Fundamentally White would like to push Black around in order to invade the bottom...
ff - Makes White safe in the upper right, but probably this is too passive.  See the variation...
ff - This looks like the wrong direction.  White should want to build up the outside strength in order to invade the bottom 3-space extension.
ff - This looks like the wrong play.  First, it pushes from the top right, but the top right offers nothing for White.  Second, Black has the slide at S12 to damage White's eyes.  Therefore it is not a good idea to let the top right stones be cut off in sente.
ff - White has to go back and connect but this is too slow overall.
ff - This leads to Black being stronger than White here.  See the variation...
ff - White is pushing from behind here.  This play does not really threaten the right side Black stones.
ff - Black correctly judges that the lower side stones are more in need of strengthening.
ff - In the game White uses this stone to make the lower right White stones safe.  However, this is a very sad result strategically.  White ends up far behind.  However, White does not seem able to attack the whole Black position and White's stones could end up under attack if he is cut during the fighting.
ff- In the game, Black answered this play.  However, I do not see how White would kill if Black played away.  See the variations...
Of course here I didn't black to make territory on left or else I would be behind by a lot. But is this the best? Perhaps there is a better point? Like E7, to make territory in the center?  ff - Currently Black has a significant lead.  White has to attack something and the lone Black stone is the only realistic target.  This pincer attack makes sense.  Probably it can not succeed in this situation, but it is the right try.
ff - Black plays it safe.  If Black jumped again to G7, it is not clear who is attacking and who is defending.
ff - White can not let Black simply connect, but Black is too strong at the top for this to work.
ff - This was good enough for Black, but the cut at D10 looks better.  See the variation...
ff - Black is absolutely alive.  Objectively White has a lost game.
ff - A strange thing begins to happen.  Until now Black has been aggressive all around the board.  Suddenly Black begins to play very conservatively and White starts to take the bigger points.
ff - Good judgement.  The center is definitely bigger than the lower left edge.
ff - Another very slow, thick play.  See the variation...
ff - Another big play.
ff - In the first half of the game Black has outplayed White - with a lot of help from White.  Now, in the second half White builds forty points of territory in the center by destroying Black's thickness - with a lot of help from Black.
ff- Black pulls out a stone that does not count, and...
ff - White connects two stones that do count.
The plan if black cut was is the shown sequence. Just incase you were wondering :) (Don't think you were wondering though, or at least I hope you weren't)
Similar to the last one, if black did not reply I would cut at N14 and capture the 3 stones.
ff - These three stones are not as large as a play in the lower left, for example, but they complete a remarkable sequence where White has taken just over forty points in the center where nothing existed to start with. :-)
Very bad move I thought was a mistake, r4 would have been better.
ff - Very nice idea.  The order is slightly wrong, since Black could have escaped cleanly here.  See the variations...
Was expecting a different order to this, and misread a seki (it should have simply been alive), or a kill(if he made a mistake)  ff - At this point I do not see how Black survives without a ko for life.  See the variation...  Comments end at this point.  Thanks again
Here I misplayed this... but played it wrong because i did not expect A15(since he kills himself). The marked position kills black.
Bernd: The main point about the opening is that you should always try to make your stones work together and care for that the opponent's stones don't work well together. In your joseki handling you both don't care enough for that, as you can see later.
Bernd: White should play safe as in the variation.
Bernd: But white insists on the corner ...
Bernd: ... making you take the outside ...
Bernd: Now atari ...
Bernd: This is gote. White could live in sente playing B15.
We deviated from joseki here, but I don't think I ended too badly. D9 may have been too far?  Bernd: I don't know joseki well, but there should be a deal for both, one getting some territory, the other influence, or both get equal share of both. And both players should choose their joseki in concern to make their stones work together and having healthy positions. Neither white nor black have really accomplished this.  When you play out a sequence, try not to think too one-sided. Like: What do I get? Or: What do I destroy? Deal with each other - and try to get out of the deal with a slightly better result, concerning the whole board. And concerning joseki: The question is not if you play a joseki or if you deviate from it, but *why* you do so! Every of your moves should have a clear purpose. If you have an aim and you find a joseki which accomplishes this aim, alright. But why have you deviated? What was your reason?
Bernd: Here white hurried a bit to settle the lower left, while the whole board was still open. Instead of D7 he could have gone for the right side or kakari in bottom right.
Bernd: Now you got a really nice point.
Bernd: Probably black wanted white to enter 3-3, to get a moyo. And white did know that this was rather good for black, so he didn't allow it.
I keep playing this, even though the keima is supposedely correct. I don't know any pincer joseki at all.  Bernd: I also don't know the joseki, but I would have also played this move. While attacking, what move does while at the same time defending the corner, you have to make an effort to attack in a way, that won't hurt you later, after the attack is over. The keima wouldn't guard the side as well, the three black stones in the lower right wouldn't work well together. Q6 is fine.
Bernd: I think, you should either answer in the corner to keep white weak, or try to attack him in from the outside, enlarging his own moyo. Why should you take the few points of territory from him if you already got far better prospects? Upper side is still open. Only invade if you have to, because you are behind! This move weakens in a way the right white group, because it helps your M-group. But you don't want to hunt white right into the upper right, where you have your own potential destroyed then.
Bernd: So black has taken the corner from white. Quite expensive to allow. On the other hand, black got two weak groups on the outside. White just has to find a way to attack them right ...
Bernd: Wrong direction! What is down there? A few points? Since white allowed black to take the corner, he has to profit on the outside - not by connecting underneath on the line of defeat in gote. Always break out into the center. Only if that road is already closed, live!
Bernd: This is meant as a kind of double attack, I suppose. But since this stone has no connection to the other white position, it is mainly a weak stone all alone.
Bernd: All the moves white made, helped black, and gave white close to nothing. All the weakness in the left position is suddenly gone. White has two weak stones and one or two points more in the corner, which he probably would have got in the endgame anyway. White certainly played too friendly to you, helping you out, letting you live easily whereever you want!
Bernd: White connects his weak stones back ...
Bernd: And black is far out.
Bernd: White has fallen behind now and starts invading. But invading won't get him points, it will only help you to solidify your territory. On the other hand it's hard to see in which direction white should develop anyway. Since the white wall in the upper left has still that peephole in it, he can't expect to accomplish very much around there. Black has around 50 points, and white only maybe 30 - even if the invader survives! To me this seems like a lost game for white.
This might have been sente, but I ignored it because it looked like bad shape to me.  Bernd: There is no absolute sente. The question is: What is the threat? And if you don't care about the threat, then you don't have to take gote. But in this case what do you, black, want to do with your won game? Carry it home, I assume. So you should do what you can to keep whites stones as weak as you can - so that you can hunt him out further. If he settles, the attack is over. The weaker you keep him, the more territory you can solidify on the right and the upper sides. Now he is just asking you to solidify the right side - and you don't want to take this present?  The question again is not if you should tenuki or not, but *why* you tenuki. Always try to aim for some kind of profit, don't make random, joseki-like moves or tenukis!
Bernd: Good, one by one erase the aji in your position.
Bernd: Black gave white a good excuse to fix his hole. White is stronger, but what has black accomplished? He has only weakened this left group a bit. Not fatal - but one more mistake like that and ...
Bernd: Although this is nice - letting him fix the wall and then render it useless. ^^ Still, you shouldn't endanger your own stones!
Bernd: At this point finally black has to become aware that his life is in danger. This group is worth about 40 points, and you just can't give a group of that size up! If you would just manage not to lose like this, by not caring for the weakness of your large groups, you would win a lot more games and certainly climb a few ranks. Possibly you know the feeling of getting stronger: Lower rankings just die on you, you don't even have to do much. So to get stronger: Care for the life and death of the stones!  (When I was a 6k, I didn't really count territory. Do you know, how you count the dead group? Count every dead stone twice, then the empty spaces in between, and finally the points of territory the dead group would have possessed, if it had lived.)
Bernd: This is a good move. But still: Of course living comes first.
Connecting here lost me the game. The rest of the game was trying to make enough points to recover enough points. I got greedy and lost my center later too.  Bernd: I think, the point of defense was earlier. Anyway, after you lost this group, the game is over (which it was before, but the odds have changed ^_°). The board is divided between white and black. Before you were in lead with maybe 20 points, now white has the 20 points lead. If you both display a comparable endgame skill, the result won't be changed.
Bernd: Now finally black erased the aji down there. Probably white didn't know the sequence mentioned earlier? Well - it doesn't help any longer anyway.
Bernd.: This move only takes away your liberties. Not good with so much aji around.
This mistake caused me to resign, even though I was behind quite a while already.
Bernd: Life and death is the heart of the game. Buy yourself the book: "1001 Life and Death Problems"! That is a great really, really helpful, and really not too hard. Solve a few problems every day. By this you not only develop your reading skill, you also get in the *habit* of reading - and in the habit of thinking in terms of strength, weakness, potential, life and death.  And you should practice how to count, so that you know if you can play it safe or if you have to take risks.
[jasonolson] I thought that this was a bad move, that black was over-stretching too far. I wasn't sure how to respond though. I could have simply defined my corner with A, or split black with B or C. Since I was unsure, I decided to go elsewhere.  P : bj4 is not unheard of, but it is uncommon and is often considered an overplay, meaning it reaches further than is actually useful. Therefore, in this case it can be considered as prioritizing influence.  You were right not to play b or c, as black's response would be to enclose the lower right corner, leaving white to fight towards the centre while black builds up strength. If white wanted to enclose the lower left corner, e4 is better than e3, getting him a little higher up to combat black's influence.
P : As black here, I would ignore this white's stone for now and play q5. In the ishi press book, 'In the beginning', the author suggests first taking corners, then dealing with enclosures, then extending, then addressing other concerns. Approaching the stone at q16 is not the best move at this point.  A stone on the 4-4 point (such as q16) is a stone played with centre influence in mind, as the corner territory can always be taken by a stone played behind it at the 3-3 point. In fact, it would take two more plays for black to secure the top right corner, so white's approach is perhaps premature.  I would suggest the approach at r5 instead. There is a proverb that states that area in front of an enclosure (shimari) is valuable. If black were to have enclosed that corner before white eventually made the r5 approach, the stone at j4 would look a lot stronger and an invasion there would be more difficult.  White could also play the high approach at q5, aiming to play somewhere between black's two stones on the lower side.
P : Although it is played fairly often, Black's move here is not joseki, being too far away from the corner stone to be of much use, and leaving the upper side open to a second approach, which is just what white goes on to do. n17, 016, q14, or q11 are the usual joseki moves. Included are some simple variations.
P: Good calm response. It makes the enclosure of the top left very valuable, and makes the k16 stone vulnerable.
[jasonolson] Was a little shocked by this move.  P : Yep, that's a surprise. An extension from k16 towards the centre is the right idea, but this is a bit much, with the board still open everywhere... A bit of general wisdom around playing against stones at tengen (the centre point). Tengen is not often played in the opening these days because it is not associated with any territory and only really becomes useful during fighting that spills towards the centre. So, when playing against an opponent who plays at tengen, it is important to try and keep the fighting contained. If you manage to do that, you will usually win.
[jasonolson] My aim was to split black's top and to isolate black's marked corner stone (and perhaps take the corner at a later time).  P : You have the right idea, for sure.  White seems to have wanted to put equal pressure on the two black stones on the top side. However, n16 is too far away from the corner stone, allowing black to comfortably play 017 next and, as happens later, push out towards the centre while you need to spend moves to live.  See the first variation. White was probably wary of giving black enough room to make a comfortable extension from the k16 stone. However, white would welcome this extension, as black would have violated the proverb against playing contact plays on weak stones. This would allow white to build up strength while black struggles. See second variation. (Second variation starts the same as the first one, branches on black's move)
[jasonolson] Rather than jumping out to A, I felt that playing O-16 allowed me to connect to the marked white stone. However, this is too far in hindsight. Black could sever my stones by playing at B or C leaving my two stones with out a base (and in big danger of survival).  P : You analysis of this situation is right on.  The terms used to describe w016 here and a posisble wn15 are Heavy and Light. Light play is loose and versatile, keeping options open and not placing too much importance on particular stones and configurations. Heavy is to have to many stones in one place that can be cumbersome and easily attacked, as happens here. Spending an evening learning about heavy and light play will increase your strength by two stones (it definitely did for me!).
Black makes a docile, submissive, heavy move.
[jasonolson] Jumping out and trying to connect to the right side, further isolating black into the corner.  P: Good instincts, correct direction of play (if you aren't familiar with the term 'direction of play' check it out on sensei's). I like it better at p14 though, where it would definitively connect the two stones on line 16 to the r14 stone, as well as sealing black into the corner.  White's ogeima (large knight's extension) here from r14 to 013 is not a solid connection in light of black's strong position. Black manages to attack this weak connection several times throughout the rest of the game, ultimately killing the group r14 is part of.  I'm sure you know this but it doesn't hurt to restate it -- maintain connections and make them carefully. It will avoid fleeing and making honte or gote moves later on.
p : You played calmly and steadily, allowing black to play p14 q14, which are fairly useless (if the next move supports the line 16 stones), while you build a wall. To support the line 16 stones, white might, for instance, a play at L15 or n17, each of which force the k16 stone to flee while also increasing your strength. Check out some possible variations on the next move (They are just general ideas).
[jasonolson] I wasn't worried about the cut at A because I thought I could capture in a ladder. I hadn't realized that this wasn't the case though as the two marked stones would be captured. Since I thought the cut at A was defended, I decided to claim some more territory.  P : The cut at A is weak, but it is not urgent to defend it -- check out the variation on the next move where black makes the cut.  R5 is a good move for sure, very big and working in excellent conjunction with the wall as well as reducing black's ability to make territory on the bottom. However, one must make urgent moves before big moves, and it is urgent to protect white's line 16 stones
[jasonolson] Wasn't expecting such a close pincer. But I figured I could still easily make life in the bottom corner. Rather than fighting Q-6 directly, I felt making a base would be better.  P :An uncommon move by black. Itseems quite weak.  Probably the best move for black would have been o4, following the proverb to play away from thickness without being too passive.
[jasonolson] Preparing to jump at A, B, or C in order to make a base and live.  P : Your thinking about making a base and living at the bottom is smart and represents good instincts and a knowledge of how to settle your groups.  It's not a bad move, but personally I like the fight better.  Check out the variation.
P : This move is also submissive. White should not allow himself to be pushed down close to the edge when black's position is so weak.
[jasonolson] making a base to live.
[jasonolson] Not worried about cuts at A or B as I can capture either because of the liberty at C (and connection with labeled stones).  P : True enough. One of the most important things to know in this game is when your groups are safe and when they're not.  However, this result is quite bad for white. while white lived small on the side, black built up huge thickness towards the centre and largely cancelled out the influence of white's wall higher up, making a strong wall into a weak group. From your comments, it sounds like throughout this exchange, you were mostly worried about simply living, choosing t play defensively, when you really should have been on the attack -- there's a proverb that says use thickness to attack, which you were doing when you played the approach r5. You had sente going into the exchange, but gave it up after black's first move against your approach by immediately going on the defensive. For more information about this sort of thing, there are some good articles on sensei's about 'fighting spirit' (there's a japanese word for that that's more commonly used that I can't remember).
[jasonolson] Threatening to move at A in order to secure eye-space and take corner.
At this point, since white's group is alive, it would have been best for white to take sente to a larger point elsewhere.
[jasonolson] Takes vital liberty away from marked stones and threatens to cut at A  P : This is a strange move for black to make. Perhaps s/he was hoping you would not notice? If that's the case, it's a bad move and a waste of a ko threat. Or perhaps s/he did not want your group to sneak out and connect to the wall higher up. If that's the case it's premature, the white corner group is alive and the wall above wall has not yet come under attack. You could choose to ignore this move, sacrifice the two marked stones, and break out into the bottom instead. See the variation on the next move.
[jasonolson] Prevent cut and can make two eyes to live by playing at A  P : See the variation for another possibility that I feel is stronger.
[jasonolson] Can't play at A as it is captured in a ladder. In hindsight, perhaps should have played at B in order to threaten to break out of corner and to gain one more piece. Q-1 is a safe move, but perhaps too slow.  P : You're right, safe but slow. in fact, the white plays at r3, q2, and q1 were all too slow. There's a concept in go called ambient temperature that talks about the'hotness' of the board. Hotness means, more or less, the size of the moves available. The board is still very hot, with many huge points open to both players, such as e4 and c15 and d10. WHite's last few moves would be better played once the board cools down a little bit, as the group was able to live without them, using sente now for one of the big points.
[jasonolson] Not only jumping from marked white stones and defining more of the right side, but also threatening to cut at A since the move at Q-10 is a ladder breaker. If not caught, cutting at A with the ladder breaker at Q-10 would also potentially allow me to capture black's marked stones.  P : If you wanted to, you could have just made the cut. The ladder doesn't work. Take a look a the variation -- there's a bit of talk about how to use the aji of ladders in it.  It would be best though to make a larger move somewhere else and leave the cut for later. Any move on the left side is larger than the cut, so black would probably respong (or else let you make a second large move) so you can come black and make it later.
[jasonolson] Good move for black. Negates the ladder breaker at Q-10, though I didn't realize it at the time.  P : It also builds black's moyo and presses on white's group there, making restricting options and beginning the attack.
[jasonolson] Bad move on my part. I hadn't realized that black P-9 enabled the ladder again.  P : It happens. the most viewed professional game on go4go involves the misreading of a ladder -- to hilarious and disastrous results. The important thing is that you recognized that your group in the top right was threatened and made moves to defend it. It's not always easy to realize when your groups become weak, especially if your focus has moved to another part of the board.
[jasonolson] Once again, ladder's broken since he can turn the corner and capture. These are all wasted moves.
[jasonolson] Here's where I noticed the ladder being broken since it "bends" around the corner.
P : All of this has left the q10 stone high and dry, and the group on line's 13 and 14 eyeless. A tough spot to be in.
[jasonolson] Securing corner and threatening to come out to the bottom  P : Very good.  It's these sort of moves that allow you to win the game. For the rest of the game, you play every big point.
P : Extremely slow.
[jasonolson] I didn't mind "staying ahead of the race" in order to exert greater influence into the center.
[jasonolson] Not worried about cut at A since it is easily captured in ladder.
[jasonolson] Didn't do ladder at A because I felt I could threaten with J-16. This allows me to eventually secure top-left corner even more.
[jasonolson] capturing in ladder. no moves beyond this necessary unless black runs...
P : I prefer the basket capture here. Black can't escape, and the two groups are joined.
[jasonolson] I felt top left territory is looking great. Between that, lower left and the right side, I believe white is in pretty good shape on territory.  P : Ya, white's looking great. All of his moves have been much larger and more effective than black's for the last while.
[jasonolson] In hindsight, perhaps playing at A is better for white. This capturing can still be done later. By not playing at A, black can play at A instead of seperate white's top left from center.  P : The two black stones could have escaped if you hadn't made the capture.
[jasonolson] Connecting. Still not worried as my stones are fine since I can still connect to the right and make a second eye there.
[jasonolson] Claiming more territory. Can't cut at A because it would be captured in ladder.  P : This move is definitely the right idea. however, it could have been better placed.   the extension would have been better made from the shimari at the bottom, making the largest, most secure territory possible.  variation.  The ladder is a bit more complicated than it appears. See the second variation.
[jasonolson] I was originally thinking this move would connect my top group to the group on the right side. However, this doesn't connect as it allows black to separate the two groups by playing at A followed by B. Instead move 74 should have been at C. Then if black plays A, white plays B, or vice versa. If black separates these two groups by playing at A->B, then the top stones are dead.  P : Ya, that's unfortunate. Shit happens, and this way, you get to practice dealing with difficult situations. One of the reasons I don't play online much is because the timer gets to me and I make poor judgment calls, like this.
[jasonolson] At this point, I knew the top group was in trouble, so my only hope is to keep on running to try connect to the left group.
[jasonolson] Threatening to play A, killing black's stones and connecting top stones to left groups.
[jasonolson] Continuing to run left to connect to safety. If black playes hane at A, white can cut at B, killing back's marked stones.
[jasonolson] White's marked stones are now safe since black's marked stones are dead.  P : Nicely done. You out read your opponent.
[jasonolson] Threatening to cut at A  P : This is a pretty pointless move by black. It would be best to ignore it and take sente to quickly settle your group.
[jasonolson] Preventing cut (since no need to capture black's marked stones (they're not going anywhere yet)). Contemplated playing at A but figured separating black's two groups won't do much compared to what white will lose if allowing black to cut at O-12.  P : Your group of stones there can no longer run towards the centre is in big trouble if black plays under it, at s11 or somesuch point.  Connecting that cut doesn't really do anything to make it better, and is allowing black to dictate the direction of play. White needs to get control of eyespace there before black does. This variation is one idea.
[jasonolson] Trying to live in the corner starting at 3-3, further reducing black's territory.  P : Haha, well done on the 3-3 invasion. As a general rule, it's impossible for a 3-3 invasion to survive behind the black stones present, sometimes called 'the three crows'. But good for you for making it work anyway. If you're interested, here's a variation (on the next move) for how black could have prevented that.
P : Kindof a silly move black. Variation.
[jasonolson] Trying to make enough room for two eyes in the corner.
P : Black could play s19 here for the chance to kill white in ko, which would probably happen as black has many more ko threats at this point.
[jasonolson] Preventing black cut at A, allowing white to make two eyes. If Black plays B instead, white plays C and makes two eyes with D.  P : The vital point! Haha! You are a go pirate! Plundering where your foe thought they were most secure.
[jasonolson] White just captures at A. If black had stone at B before this incursion, the story would be completely different (because of the reduction of liberties on white's marked stones).  P : If black had played at B, white would still have been fine, playing s18 or something.
[jasonolson] Capturing black's stone and able to make two eyes, giving life.
P : Black declines to take sente in compensation.
[jasonolson] No need to capture black's stones until black atari's with A. So, this move claims more of the left side as well as "squeezing" black's stone at D-10.  P : Excellent move, great bit of playing. You take a huge point now while black's marked stones die in gote. Normally, if your stones are going to die, at least you get sente in compensation. Search 'death in gote" on sensei's for a laugh.
[jasonolson] This move assumes that white forgets he's in atari. Black would be better served playing elsewhere. Perhaps escaping his squeezed stone by playing A, or securing territory with B?  P : You're right, black should play elsewhere. However, black could still do those things afterwards, as this move is kikashi. Kikashi is a forcing play that can usually only be answered in one way, leaving the player of kikashi with sente afterwards. This move is just a waste of a ko threat, but check out kikashi on sensei's. It's a great technique to master.
[jasonolson] Forced to capture...
[jasonolson] Threatening to cut at A, capturing marked stones.  P : Black wastes another ko threat.  You could ignore this move and go  elsewhere. You respond at r2 though, a move that is much cooler than the ambient temperature.. Black capturing those stones is worth six points -- two stones captured, two points of black territory, white's territory reduced by two. However, there are still points worth much more around. This could be an opportunity to take sente to help your upper right group, or to play f10, likely killing the black d10 stone.
[jasonolson] Connecting, preventing cut.
P : Black should have started this attack from the other side, playing on the 11th line. Black's error leaves white a chance to live, but white's response at s13 dooms it, unfortunately.  s13 can lead only to a capturing race, the only possible outcome of which is death for white. Reading more than a few moves ahead is very difficult, but it does come with practice and is the single most valuable skill for improving your game. One way to do that is to solve go problems -- practice thinking about the problems without placing stones on the board, rather visualize them. It's a good habit to get in to. Here's one way white could live. there may be others
[jasonolson] White's stones are now dead in this capture race. Even worse though, white's marked stones are VERY close to being dead (if not dead already) because there is no longer eye space to live (and nowhere to run to.
[jasonolson] Pointless move. The marked stones are already dead. Should be trying to save other stones (if even possible).
[jasonolson] Another pointless move. "Hoping" black forgets to capture at A so white can capture marked stones and make eyes.
P : Black does not need to respond to this right away, although responding does remove the aji. On the next move there's a variation for how thing's go if black tenuki.
[jasonolson] No way to make two eyes now. At the time, I assumed marked stones are now dead.  P : Yup, that's one dead group.
[jasonolson] Since I assumed marked stones are dead, I need to start capturing more territory fast to make up for it. This move captures more territory and threatens to cut "under" the black marked stone, claiming even more territory at the bottom.  P : Yup, good thinking, good move. White also needs to think about how to break up black's huge moyo in the centre, but working to keep your own territory larger is a good strategy. In spite of the loss of your group, I think you're still ahead.
[jasonolson] Helping secure the corner. Didn't hane at A because it didn't feel like good shape to hane at the top of black's stones when my shape would be so weak.  P : Right idea, wrong direction. This move would be better played towards the centre at h4. It enlarges territory, increases influence, and strengthens the h3 stone to protect the corner. the hane for black underneath is tiny in comparison. See variation.
P : Better move for black would be h4, allowing white in underneath, but solidifying the centre territory while pressing down on white's framework.
[jasonolson] Futhering securing territory in corner. Here though, I'm thinking that I need to find a way to infiltrate the center territory black is starting to secure.
[jasonolson] Threating to jump to A and split black's stones in two (and reducing black's center influence). If black defends at A, also threatens to jump to B, effectively killing black's marked stone since there would be no space to live.  P : Ya! Good move!
[jasonolson] Continuing to threaten to kill black's marked stone. Also keeps white's options at A and B open to break into black's center.  P : This move is a little too slow. It allows black to get f10, which leads to the fight in the centre.  Consider the variation.
[jasonolson] Continuing to kill of black's marked stone.  P : This move is a mistake. Playing directly into the cut like that allows black to answer at e11, then take sente when you have to draw back to protect you stone. You could cut later, but it opens up your large top left territory as well. Better to play the peek at e11. variation
[jasonolson] If black defends at A, white can cut at B. If black defends at B, white can cut at A. So for now, just extend and connect at C.  P : True, but it lets black make the decisions and decide how the fight is going to go.
[jasonolson] Threatening double atari at A and allowing white to break out into the center. At this point, I felt it was more important to reduce black's center potential than to kill black's marked stones, since the marked stones aren't really gaining black any territory.  P : Bluntly, I don't like this move. I appreciate that you put in a detailed comment here to explain your thinking though.  I don't think that some access to the centre is, at this point, more important than the death of the marked stones. If they live, your top left territory is wide open and will be decimated, while the bottom area will be reduced as well. It works for you though, but that's more due to black not mounting a meaningful defence of the centre. I prefer to cut at A immediately. see variation.
P : Black defends all cuts, is safe.
P : I'd be curious to hear what you were going for with this move -- it doesn't really seem to address what's going on. If I were black, I'd respond as in the variation on the next move.
P : Perhaps this move would have been better played as kikashi at f12, working to secure your territory.
P : This move is sort fo silly, resolving to fight over a meaningless stone. Better to jump in at e13, costing white twenty points.
[jasonolson] Didn't connect at A as I was thinking this move would help white break into the center (and I was willing to sacrifice marked stone in order to break into center and reduce black's center potential).  P : Good thinking. However, it would have been best at this point to simply enter the centre at j8.
[jasonolson] Forces black to connect at A and allows white to break into center.
P : This is kindof a weird move. If you wanted to jump into the centre, why not jump into the centre?
P : The coming sequence is very painful for white. In a comment on move 155 you say you're not very good at 'cutting battles'. It's best not to engage in them. There's a proverb that says, build territory along straight lines. This is to avoid cutting points and to settle areas once and for all. After black made this move, I would suggest this variation. Later on, you ask if there was a way to play that would have saved the corner territory and broken into the centre. I believe that to do that, it would have been best to avoid all the ataris that went on around the weak black stones. Better to play solidly and build strong lines -- thickness -- then use that thickness to attack. Move 142 set you on the path to losing your territory here, attempting to capture stones rather than playing to secure territory. Allowing the black group to become heavy trying to live while you sealed up huge territories would have been very sweet indeed. Check out some of the alternatives I proposed earlier on in this fight.
P : Variation
[jasonolson] I'm not very good at these outright cutting battles. Is there a way I could play differently to better secure my territory/potential?  P : I addressed several comments a few moves back, but I'll restate. Try and build territory along straight lines. These sort of cutting and wrapping around fights only really happen among beginners. Not to say you're a beginner, because you're not, but your play in this battle didn't have the same sort of calmness and clarity to it as it did in other parts of the board. Go is a psychological game. Perhaps you were shaken up by the loss of your group on the right side and became desperate, playing too forcefully. If you timer allows it, try and give yourself breaks while playing, a moment to sip some water, close your eyes, and reassess the situation in the context of the whole board. You were ahead on territory going into this exchange and needed only to seal up the territory you already had, but instead hasty play cost a lot of space. Please don't take my comment as disparaging. Quite the contrary, I'm really impressed by your play throughout most of this game.
P : It would have been best to sacrifice this stone and play f15, beginning to confine the invasion.
[jasonolson] At this point, I'm realizing I gave up too much corner territory in order to break into center. Is there a way I could have played in order to achieve both goals (securing corner as well as breaking into center)?  P : I spokle to this a bit a few moves back. If you want to have some more dialogue about this sequence, send me an email and I'd be glad to talk more.   I find that in games where I win, I'm not critical enough of my own tactics, not asking the sort of questions you ask above, which is the path to learning.
P : Good.
[jasonolson] I felt this secured the top left territory. Didn't want to hane at A, as I wasn't sure how it would play out if black responded with the cut here at B-12.  P : Ya, the hane would have ended badly, you're right.
P : this is a poor move. It does not have any effect on territory. Black should have jumped in at b9 if s/he wanted to continue invading.
[jasonolson] Peaking at A. If black doesn't connect at A, white plays here, cutting off black's upper-left stones, more than likely killing them in the process.  P : Good move. This is a good example of kikashi, a forcing play that can only be answered one way. However, one of the important things about kikashi is that kikashi stones should be treated as light and disposable. Your next move is to play back at d13, which is heavy. The purpose of a kikashi stone is to make your opponent go around it in order to get where tehy want to be, which in this case is into the gap around c13. The kikashi stone prevents that in sente and doesn't need to be supported.
P : This move is very slow. Better to start your invasion of the centre now, as black could ignore this move and defend against it.
P : Also very slow, but again, black's response is slower.
P : Not necessary.
P : In this, rather than respond to black's hane, I would rather jump into the centre and begin a process of mutual damage (check out mutual damage on sensei's). Consider the variation
P : Sealing up territory is a good instinct, however, white's ability to reduce here is much more threatening than black's, and white will probably end in sente, allowing him to play these smaller moves. Best to jump into the centre.
[jasonolson] White's marked stones are already dead, no need to further reduce territories. Perhaps black would be better served playing at A, preventing white from further breaking into the center?  P : Yup, black would have won by a lot if s/he's played at A.
[jasonolson] Further reducing black's center influence/territory. Also threatens to cut at A, capturing black's marked stones in a ladder (actually, a net?).  P : Haha, yes, a net it is. Good move.
[jasonolson] When I played this, I was thinking I was connecting my invading stones to my solid group on the left (by preventing black from playing this point first). However, if black were to play J-7 instead, white can play at A and remain connected. So this move is not necessary. So perhaps B or C would be better?  P : Good analysis. Both b and c are large moves, however I believe L9 should be played first, kikashi threatening the cut. Proverb : Play kikashi first in a fight, as they may not remain kikashi.
P : This response is too blunt. Black's stone does not declare any territory, allowing white to attack and flow around either side.
P : Right idea, but the bottom area is larger.
[jasonolson] Further invading, and vaguely threatening to make the marked stones live.  P : unfortunately, those white stones are totally doomed. It does threaten the cut at l10 though.
P : This move also does nothing.
P : Initiating this hane was not a very good play by white, as it loses sente. Black plays at k2, but s/he does not have to, as the k1 stone can run and connect with the black group on the other side. The best move for white could have been B9.
P : This hane was also not  good. If black had hane'd first, it would have been a gote sequence for him/her, as white would not need to support afterwards. And white's hane here is worth only one point, as black has no territory on the left to reduce. As well, when black's connects at B9, it is sente as it is also an invasion of white's territory.
P : The contact play here is not a good defence. Better to play at b7. See the variation a few moves on for why.
P : See variation here.
P : It would have been better to block underneath, as your three stones are threatened with isolation, and it's generally easier to make eyes at the side.
P : Calmly handled. These sort of pointless invasion can actually become problems if the defending player over reacts, or is tired at the end of a challenging game.
[jasonolson] Connecting center stones over to left group.
P : Eep!! Danger! Black could exploit this at B5 immediately and fight a ko.
[jasonolson] BAD MOVE. I hadn't realized that if black played at A, the marked stones would be dead. Needed to play at A, B or C instead.  P : It's good you notice in retrospect. You probably won't make that mistake twice!
[jasonolson] Black didn't notice point A either.
P : Good, playing endgame moves that are sente first.
P : This move is not associated with any territory -- better to leave it in case a ko arises (for instance, around those five stones on the left!)
P : I don't really see what you were aiming for with this move. It doesn't seem that black should have to respond.
P : If black did need to respond, D9 would have been better as it would have reduced your territory.
P : This move is honte, meaning a supporting move outside the sequence of play, allowing the other person to take sente or make a honte move as well.
P : This cut was safe and did not need to be supported.
P : This response does nothing.
P : This move reduces black's own territory by one point.
P : Another odd move.
P : That point, and others similar to it, is not worth anything, and would have simply been left neutral at the end of the game.
Llywelyn: I prefer taking the empty corner in these cases.  Nothing wrong with this play (it works well with Q16), but its something to consider.
Llywelyn:   A few regions of the board draw my eye.  There are a few really important regions on the board right now.  A - This area works with Q6 and forms a double-wing with K17.  B - Allows white to form a double wing with D10.  N3 feels like it is prompting White to play along the south side to put pressure on B's group when B extends to K3.  For this reason I would be tempted to make a move around F3 or F4 first, just to try and put some pressure on W's framework.  That having been said: this move does work out pretty well if black has the right followup.
Hoping to pressurize w group.  Llywelyn: I like the thought, though W can play R3 before jumping out, and make B's group feel a lot weaker.  This is also a weak shape, and B's group is already too weak to be thinking in these terms.   I would play the kick at Q3 first, and then jump out at K5.  That gives the double-threat of going after O5 or diving in to F3.
Llywelyn: I  might attempt to stabilize my black group now at either A or B.  H5 is devistating since it makes N3 a weak group and when W chases, assuming P4 survives (seems likely) it will probably give W the SW quadrant of the board.
Hoping to solve this problem for good, but as it turns W definitely doesnt like the idea
Llywelyn: This move hurts black more than anything, since it prompts N1 giving black bad shape.
I thought this would suffice, a bit too optimistic.  Llywelyn: Now you know ^_^  With L&D the importance is on reading.  Can you read a way to kill?  There are 30 minutes of thinking time in this game, take it and look through all of the possibilities.
a partial victory.
Taking the territory, all of it, seemed more important than destroying White's. Now R16 will be a bomb, if I get it.  Llywelyn: Don't forget the weakness at A when counting the points on the east side.  It is fairly nontrivial.
Necessary, I think. This or R16.
Llywelyn: While pushing this line works, it  leaves an uncomfortable amount of aji.
Llywelyn: I might tenuki here.  No need to force the issue of C5 just yet.
Now I must decide between life and the 6 b stones in the center. In the game I thought I could have both.  Llywelyn: Trying to save this group with moves that do not work in many respects cost B the game.   If you can't see a way to save the group, try playing elsewhere.   You may find a way to save it later, or a ko may come up and you can use the threats to save it to your advantage.  I've marked a few moves I  might consider instead.
Llywelyn: This is an example of a move that makes things worse for B.  It strengthens W's ability to punch through into the eastern side, gives her a solid eye, and removes a few ko threats.
Llywelyn: Mistake.
That seems to turn the game in my favour since I have tons of local ko threats.  Llywelyn: Its worth noting that Black has to win the ko at A, B, *and* C.  B has enough liberties, but each time is free sente for White.
Llywelyn: W should probably just let B live , take life in sente, and go invade R17.
Since I have another two local ko threats at P1 and M9, W threatens instead to win by territory. So I must also leave the ko alone...
A turning point. W says - you can win the ko at B10, but then I destroy your territory or - you can stop me here, but then I'm ahead in ko threat
W's winning idea is clear. Still I'm not too far behind, but I felt that way and played with less accuracy.
Llywelyn: This causes B a lot of grief later.   Just playing P16 is sufficient.  This is the last comment.
This feels like a perfect directional move. It hurts the influence of D16 while attacking. If I remember correctly, D9 accomplishes the same goal but gives a more harsh attack. I'd hardly know all the variations as to why, though. :)
With this, I believe you have no choice but to cut and fight. This should get messy. :)
Humm, unusual I would expect A instead
I'm not sure what will be correct here, but I'd feel very tempted to just seal in the corner/side and have the points.
Though is helps W get stronger on the bottom, I might be tempted to play G6 first. It is a forcing move that improves your shape as well. It is a key point between the W and B stones. Assuming W defends that play, you have time to attack the left side stones more thoroughly. --   I don't really like this anymore, after white's play I get into bad form. maybe just a Kosumi (A) instead ?
G6 still seems valuable, after which you may be able to aggressively E9.  don't know what's the Shape ove here is .. or maybe g6 myself ?
Now I have a problem that I don't like any move :-)
Painful, hehe. White ceases control of the game with this move.  This wasn't intentional .. just misread.
trying t start on moyo or something
This is just the idea I had in mind as well. I think here you can use the touching play of J5 as well.
This move seems to hurt, though. It seems to have a weakness if you start with a force at Q7, but you may need to develop some strength around R14 first
Want to strengthen the left side
W chooses a good directional play.
It is easier to flatten the top with K16 because you have some center-facing stones.   A was suggested instead.  My idea was that I play first here because there's more room on top to reduce later.
I wanted to treat that stone lightly but decided to move up  anyway for now
I don't think this can be afforded. --  Well maybe not big enough at that time.
Quite far jump. but I don't want to run away in a straight line. I figure that will just have no chance to win at all, but try to build a wall instead
I guess white still should push first
just forcing sequence to reduce and strengthen my group I thought
meant to make that territory more safe, but I dunno if that is a good spot.
liza [-]: ^^
Yes, I think you got more than you deserved in the center, hehe. I would probably play C8 before this move. It threatens the W group a bit and the side is larger than the few points this move adds. --  Well that plan with the wall and middle worked so far. I'm not feeling really behind like now. Though the bottom territory is still quite open
White overplay
white prolly should play a first now
maybe A .. thought about that. looked more solid this way though
I thought this was bigger then m7 first .. I wasn't sure if it works
Well, I try to protect what I have but it failed :-/
I think you will have a hard time winning at this point.   C is probably the best point here. --  Well so far so good .. I'm feeling behind now.  Marked big moves I see here.  I tried A first, but I can't find a sequence to keep sente. So I should probably leave it. or is there a better sequence
A instead and those stones are dead
can A kill now ?
don't really think this is necessairy
A is much better then my ingame move, migth even be enough to turn tables again  Variants added
J
bad blunder
An unfortunate turn indeed. It was a moderately close game back and forth. I think perhaps W got too much on the right and should not have been allowed to live on the bottom.   I think you should continue to play in the manner that you do, and continue to strengthen your attacking skills. You lost in the end this time, but I think you will progress quickly using this style because you played it very well.  Had the original snapback not occured, this would have been a more simple game for you, so try to watch for the basics. :)  Let me know if you have any further questions! My email is helxis@comcast.net.  Thanks, Tim --  and I resigned as I'm sure I lost now.
JT: You might also consider a pincer here. For instance in A. I added two common Joseki variations for this pincer.   The C15 is ok too (the one you played).
JT: Nowdays at pro-games one often sees that do not play according to the joseki at A or B but tenukis to approach the lower left corner. See the variation.
I believe the upper left corner is joseki. JT: Yes it is. See some variations from the previous node.
This was more a reaction than a well-thought out move.  I either moving along one of the open sides or against the corners would be better.  JT: You are correct that this is not a good move. Its a bit slow... Approaches either to A or B would be much better.
I would prefer some other answers than the D3. See the variations.
JT: The problem with the E3 move is that it tries to secure the corner but at this point it does not do that. 3-3 invasion at C3 lives.
JT: It is not very effective to play all stone on third line or all stones to the fourth line. One shoul have balance. The marked stones would be much more effective if the L3 stone would be in A. The territory is still quite secure but the influence to the center is much better.   The 3-3 invasion possibility is shown in variations. Thus, I would have considered other ways to answer black F3 approach. See variations from node 19.
... JT: Playing C6 would secure the corner too, just more points. See variation from previous node.
Yeah, this move was kind of foolish.
My expectation was that black would respond with r8 and white would r11.
At this point, I think I'd changed my mind or something.  JT: This is works well at this situation if black plays R17 but since black played R15 this is not so good because it gives black more influence and you only get the corner life. See the variations from th eprevious node.
Despite black's low amount of actual cash, I noticed at this point that black seemed to have superior center influence.  JT: Yep, black influence is stunning. I think black stone somewhere M9 would cause white a lot of troubles... But the idea in your move is good because now it is urgent to prevent blacks tries to make center moyo.
I really wasn't sure what to do.  I wanted to reduce f8 area or o15 area so that black wouldn't have giant territories in the center., but was worried about being cut and having the reduction fail.  Though having some reducing stones be captured probably doesn't necessarily mean reduction will not be accomplished in some manner.
JT: Both of A and B would be nice now.
JT: Continue to push while you have a chance. You have two ways to connect by eating the marked stone ot connect to the group at the lower side by A.
JT: Black should have played A now and prevent your reduction. Like mentioned in the previous node no hurry to connect because you have two ways to do that.
:)
JT: P11 is better. It connects for sure the R10 stone. See the variations from previous node.
I was contemplating q9 as well.
JT: Continue to push for Q14. Black will answer...
A would be better. See variations from previous node.
I gave up sente for very little return.
I suspect r2 was an overplay.  JT: Now its a normal move stealing points from the corner. Black answer usually to S2.
JT: In thi end you should have answer to this. You lost quite a lot points from the upper left corner in the end. Though I think you should push from G12 stone first because black will defend. At this point you have more secure area than black and also a komi so the game looks good to you.
Things go horribly wrong for white now...
I knew something ugly was coming, particularly with a14 being ignored. I even contemplated responding to k19 with j18.  JT: Lots of aji here. Especially after the black have pushed to E17.
Semedori :(
This sequence is best described as white deciding that as long as the dead stones were sente, there was no need to actually read if the invasion was possible
is it the right stone to attack C16 or is it a useless stone? and which Joseki i can use with it?  *** E17 and E16 are more common, but your approach is also joseki.
***I think this is a bad time to tenuki.  Your two stones at the top are unsafe and can be attacked strongly.
***See variation.
***This is premature.  You're going to give white a lot of influence which will only make dealing with F17 harder.
***Here you see the problems with leaving that weak group behind.  You very much want to keep pushing out into the center with your M16 group, but your F15 group is under attack as well.
how could i save F17 and F15? or is it too late now  ***You can save F15 by jumping out to F13, but white will have a great time attacking that weak group as you run.
Good!
Not so good!  You can't be cut here right now as white would be caught in a ladder.
Fortunately for you he lets you off easy.
This move says "I want to start a ko that threatens to split you.  If you win, it's great for you.  See variation.
Bad.  With this move you're abandoning this good ko and just letting white connect.
Slow, and bad shape.
Bad!  Taking your OWN liberties!
All of the moves in the variations are bigger than the move you chose.
Passive.  See variation.
Too close to your own thickness.  This move doesn't really accomplish anything.  See variation.
Unnecessary.  You have the white stones captured.  Count the liberties of the two groups I've marked.
Oops.  See variation.
Just push once.  Now this ends with gote instead of sente.
is it possible to make him alive?
Buster [1d]: hi gg`` hung4 [1k]: hi
Az: I don't know if it's a question of right and wrong, but I think I would prefere to play 'a', this feels a little slow.
Az: This type of wide extension doesn't really do much for your corner. If your opponents invades at the 3-3 point then one or the other stone won't be very useful. I think 'a' is the right move, since although it puts less pressure on him it develops your position a lot more.
Az: The result is really bad for white. K17 is much too close, and there are bad shape problems you don't have enough time to fix.
Az: Instead of the contact move, maybe cap at 'a'. Black is very thin, and you want to attack more than just lean on his group for thickness.
Az: White 'a' for sure.
is there a way to kill black A group ?  Az: No. *If* you fix the cut at 'a' then descending to 'b' is sente against the life of the top group, but even with 'b' the best I can see is seki. (You're fairly strong so I assume you know how to kill the top if black ignores 'a' and 'b', but if not send the sgf back and I'll add a variation, it's something everyone should know)
is there a way to kill black A group ?
Az: This is heavy! The proper move for black is 'a'. W should answer at 'b' immediately to attack these stones. B can't really give them up, and this way you get milage out of all your thickness.
Az: The last couple moves for white don't make sense, and here is why: if white thinks that his stone at P4 and any followup moves will be weak, then there are many better places on the board to play than P4. If white thinks that his thickness nearby makes these stones strong, then he should split black with 'a'. There is no reason to create a weak group when there are so many other big places on the board.  I think 'a' was more urgent, since it is hard to avoid falling back on the defensive this way.
Az: You should only play keima if you're alright with the possibility that they might push and cut
a bad move i guess  Az: Yes. The exchange of the two stones is really bad for you, but it can't be undone. White should attach in the corner to try to settle the group, then aim at N7 later to start a fight (once you're secure).
Az: How about a more interesting response like 'a'? Your group is very heavy, and there's no way to realistically attack black until if and when your group is alive, so it's time to stop thinking about saving every stone. White must find another answer to connecting.
Az: Big, but not urgent. You must help your group first, it is too big and too weak to leave it. 'a' would be one idea, since it gives you at least one eye and you can threaten followup on the right side.
Az: Heavy, black should extend.
Az: Getting out is big, but if black plays 'a' then you have no eye space and you're in blacks moyo. Therefore you must attach in the corner at R3 first.
Az: Overplay. Black can just push and cut, his group is strong enough. Then white is really in trouble and black will take a lot of profit in the right.
Az: Weak answer from him
Az: This is not very urent, black should link up his groups, since J17 and 'a' will be miai. If anything, 'a' is worth more when he does turn here
Az: A good move locally, but white needs to think about his own group before starting off on adventures. It burns some aji, but one idea would be to try to force 'a'-'b' in sente, if you've decided you want to attack.  White has weaknesses around that area *and* in the upper left from the joseki disaster in the beginning, so a really fierce attack is not reasonable.
Az: Gotta be 'a', the whole shape around here is getting thin.
here, my position began to collapse  Az: No, here it became evident that things were thin for a long time. Many of the problems came before.
Az: There are too many cutting points going on here, just link up your stones. Thre will be chances to cut black later.
Az: Now it is too late to get black to answer here, helping you protect the cut.
Az: After this it's hard to imagine a happy ending, white is severely on the defensive.
Az: Hane at 'a'. Your group is in much more trouble than his, so avoiding helping him a little bit isn't so important.
Az: Black got the vital point.
Az: Game over, black can't loose from this position without doing something unforgiveably bad.
Az: Wrong side.
Az: ??
isn't it an overplay ?  Az: Yes, your group isn't exactly alive....
Az: White got incredibly lucky, black can kill the entire group right now.
Az: B should just play 'a', he'll win the game by at least 15 points.
Az: Resisting the other way would have been better for white. There are still some nasty things black can do and I'd expect he'd win that way too. This was definetly the last chance though, it's hopeless after this.   End of comments, I hope they helped.
hung4 [1k]: thx
Right side for fuseki?  D: Yes, Q10 or R10 looks very well.
D: I would play R10 instead of C14.
D: G17 is standard answer to G15 but anyway I still think that R6 should be played before any other.
is the cut of w overplay? what could be the response?  D: Yes, the cutting at H16 would be overplay since there is a weakness at E17/E18. I like peaceble and safe F18 in such shapes, and then the cutting at H19 is possible or an opponent has to add any gote protecting move.
D: Too close to influence, if you don't like R6 and want play on the left side then C8 should be enough.
D: Nice.
D: I don't like this move because cutting at D8 would only help black to make a shape that weakens your shimari. I would play F7 to prevent white from making good shape after played at the same point.
I tried to chase the group but in this move i was a bit confused about what to do.  D: I would chase this group looking for further attack on the E8 group.
D: I don't like this contact move, just to jump at K8 would be better.
D: Protection the G8 is more important. The last moves you were playing little too aggessive, you try to catch the white group very quckly and directly.
D: I would prefer F7 know, tjos move either threatens the E8 group and secure the cutting at G8.
D: Still too aggresively, you shouldn't leave so many weakness around, I mean the cutting point at G8, D11 and G12.
D: Bad move, O4 or O3 looks much better but I think the biggest one would be O10 because makes the N9 group very safe and moreover starts to build a moyo in the upper right area.
D: I think black is little lucky here, white's R4 would be better answer.
D: Move at N11 would be more solid.
instead of exchanging,  In this point i decided to exchange those groups. was that good?
D: Necessary move or white might kill the black D12 group playing L13, but unfortunately M8 group is almost dead now. It is result that you were playing too aggressivle and allowed your opponent to divide your weak group.
D: OK, give your group up taking another one in return is good strategy, much better then trying to save M8 playing N7.
D: Not required to allow white for living in the corner, see my variaton.
after this point in endgame w punished my weak points, w+ resignation. thank you very much for review. muammer  D: Yes, you will do few big mistakes in the endgame. At the moment you are few points ahead.   Greetings, darek
thank you very much for review.
ff - Looking across the board, there is a major choice here.  Playing the connection says that White will build a position on the lower right and handle the inevitable attack on the lower left stone in a way that will prevent Black from gaining too much of an advantage on the left.  The alternative is to play on the left and let Black cut at H3.  See the variation...
ff - This is an unusual choice here.  It is from the 3-4 joseki when White approaches at 5-4 and Black attaches on top.  The danger is that Black will give White too good a position on the right without being able to compensate on the left.
ff - This looks like an overplay.  White is cut into three here while Black has only two groups.  Since the ladder does not work (even if it did initially, Black has the atari at K5 to break it), White is being extremely optimistic.  See the variation...
ff - Although the White stone looks lonely on C4, it is in the corner and Black is not.  Is B6 an overplay?  It invites White to cut.
ff - Black will inevitably cut White.  The question is whether White can play D5 and force a way into the center.  There is no easy answer to this.  See the variations...
ff - See the question in the variation...
ff - A big mistake by Black.  White does not take advatage of this  on the next play.
ff - A familiar looking response to G2, but White has a much better reply.  See the variation...
ff - Far too aggressive.  This leads to big trouble for Black...
ff - A sharp play.  White prevents Black from easily making eyes here.
ff - This is the correct side and a good play.
ff - White treats R9 as a forcing move.  However, it is not.  White should simply kill the Black stones and end the game :-)  See the variation...
This is the point at which I was really lost. The game seems about even so far, or possibly even better for white, but I didn't know how to play next. I'd really appreciate some advice about a good strategy for white here. Making use of the big wall is obviously important. Also I was concerned about black making a large territory on the left.  ff - You have correctly identified the two main points here: (1) getting value for White's wall, and (2) limiting Black's prospects on the left.  At the same time, White should not think that there is some great play waiting to be made here.  This is not a situation where White can achieve everything.
ff - I think I would have made this same play.  It seems a little more positive to try to use White's strength before worrying about Black's potential on the left.  This is the right direction, approaching along the right side is far too narrow...
This is obviously a bad move. I really had no idea how to play here.  ff - The board is wider than this play implies.  See the variation...
ff - Basically White forces Black to strengthen the position here.  This is not a good idea.
ff - Both H9 and this answer at G9 are off the mark.  See the variation...
ff - This should clearly be at C14 in my opinion.  Black can push down the top group at any time so White will not be able to get full value for this jump.
ff - Big overplay by Black.  If Black just pushes along the top and then responds on the left, White may be in trouble...
I feel like I have to kill this in order to have enough territory.
This is the biggest mistake. I lost sight of what I was doing and the entire wall died.  ff - Completely agree.  This was a pointless play.  The 3 White stones have no role in the action here.
A desperate plan. Black struggles and dies and white wins by a very small amount, so it seems black has enough to win giving up the corner and taking the side instead.  ff - Agreed.  Comments end.
This was really silly. I'd been looking at this for a while but missed that black can answer B8 instead of E8
Due to b isn't a professional  I think this was a mistake...  DC: Trying out new moves is a good thing. It might not make the easiest game for black regardless of his strength, but on the other hand most opponents aren't used to deal with these moves either. It remains to be seen how much black got out of this in the end.  This stone creates a lot of influence for black in the centre; it will become easier for black to attack white groups and to rescue his own groups when he already has something in the middle.
This stone is very unusual...  I think A or B would be better....  What do you think?  DC: This extension is not safe for White (it's easy to break through it). It doesn't strengthen D16 very well and it doesn't really help the corner either. This extension is best avoided as a response to C14. Both 'A' and 'B' are good locally. Globally, 'A' is safer, which doesn't let Black utilize his centre influence. Black wants to create as many weak group for White as possible.
I played this stone here (instead of A)  because of R16 because. My experience shows that on komoku (In this case R16) is followed up by 1 or 2....  Am I right or is A better?  DC: It is true that black wants to play 1 or 2 very soon and follow up with R10 (which R9 blocks), however both options must be considered also locally, and also wih K10 in mind. K10 automatically makes it hard for White in any fight. R9 is less aggressive than R7, and doesn't let the pincering stone come under attack (not good with K10), so in this case it looks good. A peaceful option for White is O4 - it avoids creating any weak White groups. Still I'd say that R9 is good.
DC: This is an overplay on Black's part. Because White is so low in the bottom right (O3), there is not much potential in this area, and it is not as valuable as other moves on the board (such as P17, R11). Additionally, the position in the right side is not one that allows Tenuki.  White H3 now is a move in the least interesting part of the board, and helps Black accomplish his goal of flattening White at the bottom.  A good reply instead would be: 1. C6, which secures the D4 stone, prepares for a further extension to C9 (which would also pose some threat to C11 group). 2. O4, which punishes Black for playing Tenuki on the right. O4 is, in fact, a big difference, since it does all of the following: * Puts R5 in a risky position that will force Black to deal with it. * While Black is doing the above, White will manage to secure R9 stone. * P3 group will not be in any trouble, and instead of lying low on the 3rd line it will rise up to the 4th. * And finally, it will also threaten F3 (because without White O4 Black can play there himself which makes life easier on F3). It can also cause Black to double-pincer D4, but that won't have to be problematic, since White will have more influence in the bottom (and can threat F3 in order to live).
DC: Black can cut. (See variations) Instead K3 will be better, but the position is still White's disadvantage. Reading is essential.
I think a very good result for w here.  DC: This is not so; while White got a fair amount of territory and his groups at the bottom are alive, this is 3rd line territory so it's not so big, while Black managed to lower White at the bottom - this works well with K10.
I think A would be a bad move for white in this Situation because of the three marked stones.
Well, I think this stone was really tiny...  I played this stone because I feared that b could increase his terretory very easily by pressuring the the three marked stones..  Anyway, I think (after all) A or B are much bigger and really more neccessary here.  Am I right?  DC: It is true that A is big. B is not as big because approaching a 3-4 is always a big move since it prevents an enclosure (Shimari), while B still leaves the White formation weak and doesn't enclose so much.  I know White doesn't want to have to play C7 at this point of the game; but if he doesn't Black will play there (see variation) on last move).
DC: This will be difficult with G16 instead of F16. Instead White can choose to Kosumi-Tsuke at C15 (Black replies with D14) and then enclose the corner in some way (like F17, but because of G16 it will be ineffective). There are also other options for pincers (higher and closer ones).
DC: Instead at G15 should be considered as well. Even though Black will be happy to play G17 himself, this move attemps to protect a corner that can be very easily invaded, and White G15 will make good influence as well as putting some pressure on C14 (which as you'll see later will become useful when Black invades). Overall I can't say clearly which move is better, but both should be considered.
DC: This move is not so good. White chooses to retain very few points instead of showing some resistance. Blocking at B15 instead is a much better attitude - Black will have to live in the corner and try to help his C14 group at the same time. White will get to go out into the centre and attack C14 as well as H16. That is White's best way to try and turn the game over.
This is completely horrible for white....  What could white doing better (since move nr. 30)???
DC: White must capture the Black stone! Even right now it isn't captured, and this cut can completely shut G17 in the top side. This capture, even if (when) Black forces White to fill it up, will give White a strong shape without cuts that will be easy to extend from.
too small...
I sacrificed the two stones in order to prevent that b could increase his terretory on the left side....
DC: At this point White is at a disadvantage. In times like this he must be pushing for advantage. Instead of replying so easily, White needs to at least consider playing a threat before. B S3 is not a very serious threat at this moment (in the late endgame it is) so White can play R8, R7 or S7 instead. The Black group is not very strong so this is a threatening move. If Black defends, White can defend at R2, and the position will be much better than in the game - so it is a clean gain. (compare variation)  White can also choose to ignore R3 completely, since there may be more urgent things, P3 is already alive for sure.
DC: (in comparison to move 64 of the variation) Black got to play here which is good for Black and bad for White.
Again very horrible for white.....  What can w do better??  DC: This is not a good way to connect both groups. Giving Black a ponnuki shape is too good for him. Instead of O4, simply play O2 which instead will give Black a weak shape.
DC: This move may be better placed at L5 or M5. Still there are more urgent things on the board. Before playing a local move like this check that all your groups are strong, and that there isn't any weak Black group.
I played this stone in order to reduce blacks terretory, but I'm not sure if this stone can be alive (altough there is A, B and C for white).  What do you think?  DC: White is in a large disadvantage, and since the middlegame is nearly over, this move must be attempted, and it has actual chances of survival. White can't really depend on 'C' because of the following variation. Even without 'C', the 'A'-'B' area is not stable, so even if Black blocks there, White may be able to force some moves and either connect to L4 anyway or manage to run to the left.
DC: Black is forcing White to connect where he can cut - not good.
DC: In the endgame, first look for the sente moves and the big moves. This move is not very profitable since this area can't really become Black territory because of M17.
DC: R10 for example is much bigger and contains a threat.
This stone is a mistake (I think) because w through away sente....
DC: White does not have to connect here (if Black P2, White Q2), so sente shouldn't be lost.
DC: This move is not big, nor threatening. White has D19 and N10 which are bigger, and F1 is sente and bigger.
DC: Same comment, White is losing points.
Well, a hopeless try from w to win the game
B seems to be going for center influence and W for territory. In my opinion at your rank, a territory game is better. This is just something for B to think about.
W is helping the stronger group at 1 instead of the weaker group at 2. It would be better to help group 2 first.
This seems like an overplay by W, because a,b,c can be punished
Black seems to be seperating 2 of W alive groups, this is generally not a good idea. See variation.
Slow move for W, see variation.
See variation for a better move for B
B is cutting 2 groups of W which are alive, see variation.
this was not needed at this time. See variation for the possible win.
See variation.
See variation for B.
See variation for W.
See variation for B to kill W.
inimino: I think E14 maybe bigger here.  The moves are perhaps similar in value, but I would not feel comfortable leaving the C14 group to be sealed in so easily.  W C15, D14, etc seems too good.
inimino: I would play a more solid D10 here, as this move allows w to connect under (see var) which might be important in the fight that can be expected to follow.
inimino: W can still connect to the C12 stone so this all seems a little vague to me.
inimino: C12 is not captured in a convincing way so it seems to me somewhat surprising for w to play elsewhere.
inimino: The situation on the left side is so unsettled that I think b must play E6 instead.  E6 adds a black stone on the interesting part of the board, while this move is toward an uninteresting edge.  W can easily ignore this move (and should do so).  W can easily play D13, etc, and continue the interesting fight.
inimino: w apparently made an unfortunate trade of the entire left side for a wall on F3-F7.  This gives b a solid advantage.
inimino: W should like to add a move at G8 now to complete his wall.
inimino: W seems to make this move instead of G8 perhaps hoping to retain sente, but this removes aji from the C12 stone and looks even worse for w.
inimino: Immediate invasion is the natural choice.  However, R3 may be safer.  W can obviously play Q3 here after which the future of this stone is uncertain.
inimino: This move seems to be a mistake for two reasons:  First, black is ahead, and should play S2 to make his group alive.  For the group to be unsettled could give white a chance to unbalance the game.  Second, this is too close to G17 and too far from P17.  This can make the game complicated.  Putting pressure on the D16 stones could bring the C12 aji back into play.  This could even possibly bring the w wall at F10 into play which b should avoid at all costs.  I think here black's objective should be to keep the game simple and maintain the advantage.
inimino: I think black should stick to the new group he created.  The corner is already strong enough, but the two marked groups are weak.  To add a stone to the group on the side seems more urgent.  Of course you do not want the corner to be sealed in but w cannot do that with just one extra move here either.  Play L16 or something around K15, or even G16 instead of this.
inimino: As before, but more so.  The L16 group needs a move.
inimino: This is premature.
inimino: Given that you have played L15 I would suggest K17 here so as to avoid a cut.
inimino: H14 looks sente for both and seems more important than this side.
inimino: I would push harder here with O12.  However H14 now looks more significant so that limits your options somewhat.
inimino: This string of stones does almost nothing for black, but white's group is now out and the K18 group even begins to look weak.  I think this result must be the result of earlier mistakes, specifically at J17, M14, and P11.
inimino: With this, the black group does make life, but it seems painful to play such a small gote move here.  Instead I would try to move into the center first and only make life if absolutely necessary.
inimino: P16 feels more natural.
inimino: H12 would be more natural, this feels much too slow especially after M18.
inimino: Another slow move.  Perhaps here black has few other options however after the other mistakes.  Not being able to connect L13 however is painful so it is tempting to try it.
inimino: What about G12 here?  It seems there can be some trouble for the white group but only if you prevent it from connecting.
inimino: Now that opportunity has gone.
inimino: This seems to be nothing, see variation on next move.
inimino: N10 looks better.
inimino: N10 also much better here.
inimino: Much too small.  N11 kills all top white stones, see variation.
inimino: Now the w stones are all connected for the price of only two stones!  L11 was the key point.
inimino: It costs nothing to start a ko, so you should never play like this.  O18 instead and let w find a threat if he wishes to play the ko.
KennyG [2k]: thx
Here Black did not know how to respond. I only know one applicable joseki:   W B   -- P17   O17 Q17   N16 R14   J17 But, White did not play out this sequence, instead he started the avalanche joseki, which I do not know how to deal with well.    Ok, the reason white played this sequence is because of Q5 stone. Of course white is not going to   If you wanted to prevent this, you could have played at R13 or Q14 (see variations next move).
see variation for the joseki : you don't want to allow white shutting the right side (Q14).
I wanted to invade the right, but it looked dire.
This is too slow. You want to play large moves, like C6, or come from the other side at F3.  I would not get on the right side now, it seems to me too early, because it will settle the fuseki too quickly.
correct
wrong side for white. I would play M3
This game me a very bad result, but what could I do?  This is a bad idea from white.  I would cover from top (see variation)
I would cover the white stone to get sente
L3 better
This is very dangerous. A white push at L3 would be very bad.
yes.
No, you don't want to leave cutting points. see variation for a possibility.
Right after I played this, I knew it was bad, but...    B W   H2 H6   J5 C11  does not look good either.  See a poosible variation with this follow up. It's not so bad.
Black resigns here because I cannot see any way back into the game after this. Besides the one reading mistake though, I did not make any obvious mistakes, but still I am pushed around completely. This is why I would like help. Thank you again.    Ok. At this stage, white is leading because of black mistake. On the other hand, I don't think you played so badly. You just made some moves that white could take advantage of, but i did not see white 'push black around' so much.  The main points I would notice are :  - play big moves in the fuseki (corners, then corners enclosures, then big extensions on your sides. If none, get into your opponent side - see move # 15)  - don't leave cutting points when you are under pressure. If you can play solidly, you will be able to attack in confidence at later stage.  Hope this helped.  Emmanuel
wyv [3k?]: iy
wyv [3k?]: ini kurang baik sebenernya translate: this move is not good  well, this move is experimental. Hope you can help me with this   erker: Experimentation is a good thing. But you also need a plan. Otherwise, how do you tell that your experiment was a success?  If you don't know where to play, ask yourself: why play at all? (You want to defend this group, You want to attack that group etc.)  I will try to explain some of the reasons behind the moves A to C in the variations. (Please keep in mind that I will only give one single line of play to show the general idea. Some of them may have very difficult variation or follow ups. And of course they are not the only possible moves, among the others are D-H.)  From this and from later explanations it will be clear why I don't think that your move is a good one.
I'm a little confused here. Where should I go here?   erker: As we have seen, close contact plays make both groups strong, and this strength is needed for one of two reasons: defence (you're in danger and need some strength, quick; Move 7, 1st Variation [E]) or attack (Move 7, 2nd Variation [d15]). In most cases, the stone or group you're leaning on is out of the question for attack: it is against common sense to strengthen the enemy before attack.  After the exchange A for B and C for D it is far more difficult to attack the marked white stone. Therefore the strength you gain by pushing against the white corner with your last move is wasted: it can not be used to attack the marked white stone, because (a) you made it strong and (b) your strength is blocked by A and C.  To summarize: with your last three moves you played in a defencive only manner. If you want defence, play at E instead of A, C, and d15. But even better is to attack (play straight at d15 without A and C).   As a side note: The proverb says: "Play hane at the head of two stones" -- White wants to play at F sometime in the future as this ruins Blacks shape.
wyv [3k?]: jakarta
Is this move ok?   erker: In principle, this is the right way to play -- you attack and pick some profit while White has to run away.  But this will also hurt your upper left group (imagine that White can play at A).
erker: This is very bad!  The exchange k14 for A does not help you on the right, it hurts you on the left, and you never know if you later want to peep from the other side.
erker: As you later see, this is problematic. Maybe A is better.
wyv [3k?]: hebat dong
Maybe I should connect instead of this. I misread here.   erker: If you connect, your group is out in the open but with terrible shape. But that's better than two isolated groups.  If you had played on A instead of B, White C would not had this effectiveness.
Biondy [7k]: gak juga Biondy [7k]: emang kamu diajarin siapa?
wyv [3k?]: banyak yg ngajarin wyv [3k?]: gk bisa disebutin semua wyv [3k?]: hahaha
I try to build area here.  should I play the joseki instead of this?   erker: You should keep in mind that the marked black stones and q11 are on the 4th line. You're building influence -- a moyo -- and not territory. White can easily invade, but that is OK, Black only needs a plan to deal with this invasion.  Also notice that the marked white wall will reduce the power of your influence.
erker: As White I would prefere A.
I want to answer w last move, but don't know how. Could you please help me?   erker: I think your move A should be at B. That way it works better with the two marked black stones. One black continuation (with A at B) is C, or you play elsewhere.  With your move A at A, both C and playing elsewhere look a bit strange.  As B is not as aggressive as A, White may choose to enclose the lower left corner with E instead of D. That is very big, but then you can capture the marked White stone on a large scale.
erker: Better A for B first.
wyv [3k?]: tapi kamu lumayan koq
wyv [3k?]: makasar blom ada club sama skali y?
I don't want my group here dead, because I think w area would be very big.  Is there any better way to void that?   erker: I think that move is OK, but maybe a bit slow.
erker: This is way to slow: you only connect two weak groups without eye space. You should think about a more active way to defend your group. Something White can not ignore. (For example A, B, or C).
erker: Black at A is better.
I think white should answer N14
erker: The two stones are not important, so it's better for White to connect at A.
wyv [3k?]: hikaru no go
Biondy [7k]: sama ^^   erker: You can kill the white group without ko by playing at A.
I start the ko here, but I think I have lss threat.so I let him win the ko   erker: If you think that you can't win the ko, don't start it. Use your time to create more ko-threats for yourself and eliminate threats of your opponent. Then start the ko. If your opponent gets nervous and resolves the ko, that means you get an extra move for free.
erker: Better at A.
erker: Better at A.
Maybe I should play somewhere else   erker: Yes, at A for example.
erker: To ignore the marked white stone kills the lower left corner (see variations).   -=< no further remarks >=-
pourfun: et toi?
*: I don't like this approch.   I would recommend closing corner.  Order of moves:  1) Open Corner (4,4) 2) Open 3-4 Enclousre 3) Expension from sides 4) Kakari (approch a 4,4 or 3,4 stone)  So I would want to play E17 first.  That is the biggest point for you.  Please look at my variation.  *: This is a very tough opening move, leads to many complicated joseki and complications.
*: Wrong follow threw please look at my example.
*: You are heavy, white is strong.
was this a good pincer?  *: Nope.  Need to be at J4.
*: Alternatively you can try M9 arena to stop white from running that way but your one stone at K4 willl be under attack then.  So I think better option here is tenuki, or play F3. Pleaes look at example.
artboy598 [10k]: what's ur rank ? pourfun: 2d  *: Hmm your stones at P4 are looking like they might need help; so playing F4 might be hasty.  *: But with pincer at K4 I don't think you can do much there, instead this move should be G4 to give your stones some stable base on the bottom.
*: Okay now its family fight, between three black groups, which will you save?
Good answer?  *: it can be... lets see what you did.  What do you think whites goal is with H4?  In my mind it says that he wants to attack the K4 stones and F4 stones; so how can you make it so he can't attack both.  And instead he comes under attack?
*: I like starting on the other side, L3 because if you can get to play L3 and L4 it makes your position stronger and helps your stones at P3 area.
*:  ?? This move... why? Trying to avoid KO?
*: Incorrect move, correct move was L4, now you can end up with another weak group to defend.
*: first take away liberties before defending, plese look at example.
*: bad move. my teacher always said if you are going to threath a cut .. just CUT IT.   This is hoping white will be nice...
artboy598 [10k]: did you go easy on me?
*: No meaning, containment is only good if you can gain something from it .. here nothing.. Recommendation   1) Tenuki 2) Play tomake your bottom group stronger (example).
*: recommend E17.
*: you are just answering white, play your own game, this move keeps him sperate but also hurts you.
was this a good move?  *: Overplay.
pourfun: france
pourfun: you? artboy598 [10k]: are there alot of go players in france?
*: Lose for black not victory.
*: wrong shape.  Correct shape move is G7.
artboy598 [10k]: im american
*: Wrong, shape was move needed.
pourfun: yes
*: good .. but your game is lost mostly already.
*: Your position is felling apart fast.
*: Normally a shape move but here it's bad.  Because of the 1 point smae it leaves; creates weakness you don't need.  I recommedn F8, if white pushes give up two stones.  Look at example.
artboy598 [10k]: review after please with me
*: You can't save them so why try? Use them as aji nothing more.
*: White to have fun :).
*: You just gave up one more stone to white for no reason....
*: E17 is the move my man.
artboy598 [10k]: so i need to work in my fighting?  *: I don't think fighting but more knowing when not to fight.   You need to learn to play defensively,  "if defense is good to have, then its good to spend time (moves) getting it" from Attack and Defense book.  White wasn't really fighting hard, just exploiting your weaknesses.
*: Wrong Direction of play.
*: This hurts your frame work now...
*: Don't answer him directly, a direct answer will only help him, even though J13 hurts.   E17 is still a big move.  *: Other way to answer this move might be G13.
artboy598 [10k]: Tu bien!!!
artboy598 [10k]: any pro's games i should look at for reference?
*: Generally the joseki but I think you might want to try B18 because your strong below.
pourfun: b9too small pourfun: your first mistake pourfun: b9  *: Yeap mistake I didn't keep track here; but there were minor mistakes before this.  This is big because this move gets you nothing, white is not going to make lots of space there, so you playing there is a free stone for white.   You need to play big moves, when lost for moves look at it this way:  1) Do I have any weak groups? 2) Does my oponent have weak groups? 3) Are any corners open? 4) Are there any sides open?  So if we follow that logic, weak groups not really.  Corners nope, but you have top side still open.  So that has to be before that, you are at early end game so leave moves like B9 for late end game.
artboy598 [10k]: oh, i get you
*: Looks liek pourfun dicussed this with you in detail so I will not judge it any more then that.
*: Should be O17.
pourfun: you are behind now pourfun: 2 mistakes  *: Agreeded please look at comment on S16.
*: His answer was alot more fun huh ;-).  This is where do you need to fight more? YES.  See there are two types of defense, active defense and passive defense.  You are always defending passively need to become more active.
*: What does this accomplish?  No reduction, no attack, why not M15? At least you reduce him now.  The attack on his group in the middle might still be possible if you don't make it easy for him to connect.
pourfun: now w alive pourfun: and b is badly reduced artboy598 [10k]: i thought that i'd make up for my loss my reducing you artboy598 [10k]: or trying pourfun: hehe
*: Bad block you saw the problem with it....
*:  Hmm could you have done more there then just O10? I might have tried O11 ...
: Too easy.. look at example please.
Dmitry: Possible, but after black A, he will have ideal extension from two marked stones, see var.
Dmitry: too slow, A or B is better, from shimari like that (marked stones) best extension is at direction of B, not C.
Dmitry: I prefer A or B here. If you want to prevent black to build double-wing formation just play C.
Would something like 'a' or 'b' be better here? Dmitry: too slow, a or b is better
Dmitry: small move, what about A or B?
Dmitry: just A instead
Dmitry: now O9 stone is unnecessary, you just let black to move at  A
Dmitry: too slow, I prefer A, B or C here
What is the best way to reduce black's framework here?
Dmitry: I'ld like to push once again at H6
Dmitry: This is a passive move, it just defends few points of your territory, what about A? See var.
What is the best way to reduce black's framework? I was at a loss.  I felt that I had lost the game already at thist point, althought in the end the difference was only 7.5 moku.  Openings I feel are my main weakpoint so any advice on that front would be well appreciated.  Dmitry: There are two ways to make opponents moyo smaller - reduction from the out of moyo and invasion. Invasion is more risky, because if you invade and die - you lose the game. If you invade and life it can still be not enough to win. So, if it's possible to reduce the opponent's moyo - reduce it! Here I see next examples of reduction moves: A, B, C
Dmitry: good!
Dmitry: A is better
Dmitry: yes, this is a very big mistake! See var
This was a flop. :s  Dmitry: it's still possible to use aji of dead stones playing A locally, but B is better
Dmitry: too slow, you just almost built your own moyo, but black can destroy it in one move, like A.
Dmitry: strange move, why not just A?
Dmitry: What about A instead? See var
Dmitry: just one more prisoner, problem with time? If so, moves like A, B or C give more aji.
Dmitry: just one point gote, very slow
BuddyRat [11k]: aye ultra [12k]: ;)
Dmitry: Strange move, what if black has a lot of ko threats? See var.  Correct move for white is A.
Dmitry: black should try to win the ko.
BuddyRat [11k]: almost missed that :) ultra [12k]: :)
Dmitry: A is a big aji, see var.
This is curious by white. San-ren-sei, the three-star opening, is used for influence, which white seems to try to combat here. But by doing so you can get a huge corner, merely by playing Q18
Another curious move. White is nowhere near settled, and you can take advantage of his tenuki to chase him around, dominating the game.
This is too close to white, and just helps him solidify the corner, and make the long extension to O4 work well. Expand in the other direction instead.
Balanced play so far. White gets almost secure territory (the only aji I can see would be if you played C6), but so do you, and with more outward influence.
I wasn't really sure of the best way to approach this play.  What are some good responses to plays like this?  - Well, it's a splitting move, so just connect around it somehow. An attaching move above or below usually accomplishes this. Your middle group is too weak, and need strenght for an attack on whites top right group, so just expanding the corner group is not the best move.
This just strengthens white, while still leaving an open skirt on your group that white exploits later. If you want to block white from the corner, play on the same line as his lowest stone, probably F18
Blocking white works.
Much too submissive. White is leaning on your right to gain a free advantage, but have essentially tenukied from the top position, which you should exploit.
Again too submissive. Attack white, he's weak here!
White makes another unwarranted tenuki; continue on the old position to gain a decisive advantage.
This just gives white the edge advantage. Connect instead.
This does nothing now, as white is already connected and alive at the top. Focus instead on grabbing centre territory, or possibly securing the top right corner
You can accomplish the same thing and at the same time expand your centre.
You can try cutting big here.
Another splitting move, the same solution applies; attach to the stone.
I think that if I had connected at N6 rather than cutting I may have been able to kill the entire dragon.  Is this true?   - Quite likely. Either way white would have to defend himself.
Better to make a bamboo joint here (it's as safe as a solid connection), since it also threatens to cut white, and helps the connection to your corner.
This monkey jump is pretty much what destroyed my chances of even possibly winning this game.  I was wondering if there was a good response.   - There are several, the game is by no means lost.
This works, as you will see, but might not be the best move
This move is seven points, and there are larger moves on the board, even if it is reverse sente.
This is really the big mistake. It's a half-point gote move, when you have to defend your group. With a move at B here, you would probably win by 5-10 points
Now your big one is dead, but you can still save some stones in the corner.
You should have read this out fully when the situation first arose. White is alive and well.
Anyway, I hope that this game wasn't too painful to watch.  I look forward to reading your review.  Johnny5   - As a closing commentary, I'd say that you played a fairly good game. Some mistakes in reading, but everyone makes those (just deeper and deeper in the variations as you progress). In general, I'd advice to you focus your reading on situations with ataris and forcing sequences; you seem to have some blind spots when they come about, either playing too fast, or ignoring variations that you should consider. Try to look on forcing sequences as warning bells to look closer on a situation; most of the time it will be as simple forced sequence leading to a good result for the one that forces, but when they don't, you will lose out by playing along, on either side. Another advice would be to always consider tenukis; both recognizing when a situation has stabilized enough to play away, and to recognize when it hasn't, and the opponent makes a mistake in moving away. Don't blindly follow him around.
yoby [17k?]: Buen juego yoby [17k?]: igual
This move is fine. It perpares for a fight for when B is forced to invade around A
S4 is the foot sweep taking the corner by b. Seems to be a mistake as it requires little response from you (not sente) and also leaves left open.
Seems like a thank you move.
3) Was this move any good? or should I follow Joseki and do C12
Ecchi [?]: torneo?
navdaniel [18k?]: SUERTE GOMANOS
no need to let him connect see variation
seems risky, maybe A?
navdaniel [18k?]: quiero saber si reciben este mensaje
navdaniel [18k?]: respodan
navdaniel [18k?]: y perdon
skamus [-]: yo te leo navdaniel
navdaniel [18k?]: gracias!
End of comments.
4) Was there a way to make life here?
maywck [12k]: hallo
NR: You may want to consider the Chinese or the low Chinese fuseki with these moves. You need to study it first though. It is a territory focused opening and there is a good book by Kato Masao on this opening.
NR: This exchange helps white connect, while not offering much to black. Better to avoid such exchanges. You help white become strong and guard the corner extremely well. (See variation)
NR: Now your base-less (i.e. weak) stones are under attack.
NR: In the sequence that follows, black group fights to make 2 eyes and live, in an area that could otherwise be secure for him (i.e. by first playing L17 and making a base.
NR: I don't like this move very much. Perhaps the variation at N15?
NR: Do you really need to answer this?
NR: A stronger player would probably say that this move is too close to the white wall. Perhaps you could extend around Q10 at this time?
NR: First decide what you want to get out of a fight. That would help you decide what move to play. What is the purpose of E18?
NR: You force white to capture E18 and you also lose the cutting stone at G18. A pointless move that can only be said to help white solidify his position.  --> See variations starting with C16, where black takes advantage of the situation to build outward influence.
NR: Now C16 is not a forcing move.
NR: I don't understand this move. (See possible outcomes for white with C15 in the variation.)
NR: A pointless cut for white.
NR: E12 creates a more solid position. I feel that D13 is not so threatening soas to atari it here.  With D12 white gets a chance to cut at F13 in sente as in the actual game. Also note that you have the move at E15, which would allow you to connect (or damage white seriously).
NR: Still, remember the move at E15. See variation, which allows you to keep your two marked stones connected.
NR: This seems to be the reason you created the trouble with the marked group. See variations.
NR: Here you formed the empty triangle, a usually bad shape that you should avoid. See variation for better shape, though it is doubtful to me that the two stones deserved so much attention. Perhaps you should leave them and play a big move around Q10 or K4? To save the group you should have played the earlier variation showed.
NR: This hane is unreasonable, and allows white to easily cut and capture the black group.
NR: An atari on white's part would perhaps be more appropriate here.
NR: I think it's a good idea to extend, but you could perhaps extend much further, up to Q10 (at A). Now white has a chance to play there.
NR: This move is too passive. Why allow white to get so much with a bad move. R8 seems like an overplay to me. See variation with a cut.
NR: Could extend further.
NR: Again, your extension could be more efficient.
NR: You may study a bit this joseki. I don' t know much about josekis myself, but I feel you could press the approaching stone more. My usual response would be B.
NR: White has now the chance of playing at C3 (at A).
NR: This white move seems too small/slow/inefficient.
NR: Good! Since white played this way, press him. Even J3. Yes, J3 would be more severe.
NR: Good sequence.
NR: This move seems a bit slow. Could play at G7.
NR: Here you got lucky. If white played L3, see the variation and continuation! Black has no chance to live (or very few chances if a stronger player can think of something :-) ).
NR: Seems too submissive. See variation for another idea.
NR: Now M1 is an extra move, that you could have played elsewhere...
NR: White is dead. Even if white connects it is still dead, so avoid complications. Don't allow white to create a ko situation.... Take this as general advice. In your situation, you were still safe, as white was unreasonably fighting this fight.
NR: Avoid the KO.
NR:
NR: This move allows white to live with E2 and F4 now. See variation.
NR: See variation for white. A very scared/passive move.
NR: Very good!
NR: White tries to complicate things, so that he can escape. Your role is simple. Keep it simple! Play safe. See variations. To be honest, after studying the position a bit and looking at variations, I would say that even the way you played, white should not have a chance to live, let alone for the one mistake you made.
This is exactly what white was looking for. A chance to get in your territory and cause weaknesses to your position.
NR: An unreasonable move.
NR: I would refrain from using such words during a game on KGS, unless he was your friend :) Nevertheless, I understand your frustration at this point fully. Now white is alive, and the game is to be fought, whereas with a dead white group, white would probably need to resign.  elconde [12k]: Shit
NR: This is slow I think.
NR: And white gets the chance to cut...
NR: See variation.
NR: This doesn't help much.
NR: Bad shape! This cost the chance of capturing the white stones... See variation.
NR: I think this move doesn't help at all. White has a strong position.
NR: This move is not a point. See letters in previous note for some ideas on where you could play and gain points.
NR: This is a very very submissive move. You lose 4 points by playing like this.See the cut in the variation.
NR: Not a very good move. N14 would be in sente. See variation.
NR: ??????
NR: Maybe you could pass here. I don't see an immediate threat soas to answer, but anyway, if you felt pressed by time or something, it's better to be safe than sorry :)
Maybe O17 better?  O17 is a bit better, but for your level of play this is just fine
This is an equal exchange. Given all your extra stones playing solid equil exchange is wise.
I don't know if this one is good.. is it? alternatives?  There are definitly bigger better moves.  k4, and any extention off of one of our hoshi stones would be great.
Im not sure about playing this high pincer. If you dont know the joseki, dont play it.
I would have played R4 here
YOu cant leave this stone hanging. Its in great danger. There is plently of room to build a base and you can still escape. Letting your opponet have a commanding presense in any area of a handicap game brings doom.
I don't like the result at this corner .. :(  No you dont. See var
Playing to build a base at M3 also threatens whites p3 group. This move only escapes
YOu found out why this move is no good. WOuld have been better to just come down and push a bit into white territory letting the J4 stone go
THis is a fruitless move. Your group is in no danger so there is no need to connect. There is no eye space for white so your not distroying his base.  You should have attacked the white group from above instead
If you want to catch this hite group that move is no way to do it. And with whites R14 stone in your base trying to make a base is futile. However this is a good move because it helps you keep center influence which is needed here. Just becareful about WHY your make your moves.
Very well played. Whites is a fool.
I want to see variations of this, because I don't like the result :(  No offence, but you can play the variations yourself. Your problem was making this move in the first place. Better to extend your group towards the corner with D2 or try to build a base with c13.
Its too bad white had this spectacular move...I didnt see it either
Also I don't like the result of this.. Variations?  This part of the board was played poorly by both of you. I dont understand why your not happy with the result. You took the entire top side, and killed a bunch of whites stones in the process.
You misread whites intention here. Its obvious that the S10 group will live. You already cut off the white stones  connection to this group so this move is useless. Then you got punished and lost a great deal of  the value you made on the top side.
Not sure what this move is about at all.
again...what are you hoping to accomplish here?
Big..  Huge, this was one of the areas you should have taken instead of those doubious moves you played the previous 2 truns
Big..
Maybe this try to invade has no sense..
It was a good effort and the right idea. You saw your opponets weaknesses and tried to exploit them. That is the right spirit.   Im sorry I didnt have the energy to give a more constructive review. I hope you find my comments helpful. Its great that you love go so much that you have people review your games. If you found any of my comments too negitive, dont let it get you down. I just didnt have the energy for being more constructive. Good luck with your games and developing your style.  Comments end here.
Big..
Thank you for reviewing my game.
daveadams: I'm not very comfortable with the 3-3 opening, so I'm just experimenting here.  catch22: I believe it's a bit uncommon to play a 3-3 stone together with a 4-4 stone. They generally don't work that well together, as the 3-3 fits a territorial strategy, whereas a 4-4 stone goes for influence instead. However, it's good to experiment.
daveadams: Is this the right place to play? Maybe R11 instead? Or somewhere else?  catch22: I think R11 is better, and I also prefer R9 above R10. The problem with R10 is that it gives Black a continuation where his stones are ideally placed (see variation for the next move).
catch22: I think it is better to approach from the other side. See variation.
daveadams: Again, I'm unsure of where best to play here. I also considered E4.  catch22: E4 is better. This gives a more balanced position when White next extends further along the bottom (see variation)
daveadams: Too far?  catch22: No, White can handle an invasion at F3 (see variation for the next move) playing at G3 instead would be too inefficient. The White group would be too cramped.
daveadams: Were I black I would have played L3 here.  catch22: Out of K3 and L3, K3 is better as it not only extends Black's position, but also puts pressure on the white group. Playing L3 only extends Black's position, so seems too slow. Although it creates a more solid position, overall the move is less efficient.  Having said all that, Black should settle his group at the left by playing C10 or C11. That is much more important than a move at the bottom.
daveadams: This doesn't look right to me. F4 seems like better shape, but K3 is so close...  catch22: K3 is much better than F4. F4 only surrounds territory, and it's only a little, given that four stones have been used. K3 on the other hand also stops Black from invading, it also threatens an invasion at M3, and gives White more influence in the center.  Furthermore, it is important to realise that in the opening you should not aim to build invulnerable positions. That is simply not efficient. Just make sure that when your opponent invades a position of yours, you get something (territory elsewhere, or influence) in return that is just as valuable.
daveadams: Here I considered C9, C10, or C11 as another option, but decided to play towards the shimari instead.  catch22: I think it would have been better to play at C9 instead. Obviously, K17 is a big move. It is a good point for both players. However, C9 gives White a good attack on the black stones that will also help White's position. See variation.
catch22: This looks a bit premature. Black should just settle his group at the left by playing at C11. This also reduces the size of White's moyo at the top.
daveadams: Okay, this is the first fight where I didn't know how best to respond, and I think I came out for the worse.  catch22: E17 helps to strengthen Black, as it induces F16. Therefore, it is better to play D17 instead. See variation.
daveadams: This looks like a bad play to me, but I didn't manage to punish it.  catch22: This is indeed not good. It helps White to strengthen his stone at K17. Black should just play F16.
catch22: Best to just extend (see variaton). The cut at K16 helps Black to settle his stones.
catch22: This is awkward shape. It is better for Black to extend to H17. He can then either jump out (G15), or cut at K16.
daveadams: Already I'm split up, black is free, and my wall points nowhere useful.  catch22: Well, I actually think you got a good result here. Firstly, you've gotten points in the corner, with the option to extend alongside the left side of the board. Secondly, your wall effectively stops Black from getting any territory in front of his shimary. Thirdly, Black's stones have poor shape and are not out of danger yet, and they only make a few points of territory.
catch22: This is good. It punishes Black's bad shape. It takes a liberty away from the two marked stones, and if Black wants to move into the center, he has to make an empty triangle.
catch22: Good. Although White has to be careful that his stones at the right are not cut apart, Black is too weak to do so right now.
catch22: So Black is cut off from the center after all...
catch22: This move lets Black of the hook a bit. Better play at G17. See variation.
daveadams: This is the other fight where I wasn't happy with the result. My corner is weak so I chose to defend it, making yet another weak and heavy group with C13.  catch22: Once again, you are too negative about your position. It's been Black who has been making overplays, which have left him with many weaknesses. This you can punish if you patiently wait for a good opportunity to do so. I'll try to show this later on.
daveadams: Probably B15 is better.  catch22: I don't agree, because it leave a weakness behind at C16, which would give Black more chances to settle his stone at C14. Playing at C16 forces Black to play at C13, which means Black is pushing from behind, which is in White's advantage.
catch22: This is a bad move. It forces Black to connect. White should keep the option of cutting at G13 open. See variation.
daveadams: This double hane was a terrible idea. :)  catch22: Indeed. Reading mistakes like this are very costly. This move severely weakens your stones while strengtening Black's. :-(
catch22: Not good. Black unnecessarily strengthens White. It would be better for Black to play L11 and keep the option of cutting (at F9 open).
daveadams: Black's crawling here drove me nuts. I kept feeling like I shouldn't respond, but also that I had to. My R7 group is beginning to look weak, too.  catch22: The way I see it, Black has only helped you. Your stones in the center where very weak, and they are pretty safe now. Black may have also strengthened his own center group, but it was not in much danger anyway, because the white group was even weaker. So these last moves helped you to catch up. Of course, you are still behind, but that's because of the two bad moves earlier on (F12 and B10).
catch22: Although this is good shape, you could consider omitting it to take sente (you have to try something to catch up). It gives Black the opportunity to cuat at G8, but you can still connect by squeezing this cutting stone.
daveadams: I was feeling desperate at this point, so I made this probe move that I don't really understand. It turned out okay, but I think Black could have done more. Had he sealed me in and built a wall facing up my R7 group would be in bad shape.  catch22: Well, indeed, you have to try something to catch up. If you let Black make too much territory here, it is not clear how you can catch up. It is, however, an emergency measure, and not something you'd normally play. If Black handles it properly, you should not gain anything.
catch22: Black gives you a chance immediately. Black should have played at Q4, see variation.
catch22: This is already a great result for White. Black now has three weak stones to worry about and White may cause an upset in the fight that follows.
catch22: Bad shape. Black should just play Q5. This also puts more pressure on the White stones, as the O3 stone is placed perfectly.
catch22: Not good. It lets Black connect his stones after all. Play Q2 instead. See variation.
catch22: Even though White can catch this stone in a loose ladder, this stone is not worth saving. R12 would for instance be better. It expands Black position at the top, indirectly helps to defend against invasions there, and it keeps some pressure on the white stones (nevertheless, they're pretty safe for the time being)
daveadams: I think Black made some mistakes over the next few moves.  catch22: Black also made various mistakes in the moves leading up to this. Already you are back in the game.
catch22: It is better to play P4 (see variation). As it is, you still have to worry about the cut that is left behind.
catch22: Not a good move. It is not even clear to me what it is trying to achieve.
catch22: Saving the marked stone is not important. It is not serving any purpose. So it is better to play N6. This puts more pressure on the black stones. It takes a liberty away, and also does not give Black the free forcing move at N6 (Black should not play this forcing exchange immediately, but it could come in handy later on).
catch22: This is not a good move. Although it attacks the black stones, it does not really help White. For instance, it does not make any territory. You should not just attack for the sake of it, but always make sure that you gain by doing so.   See variation for a more constructive attack.
catch22: Now Black gets to play here instead of White (compare with the variation for the previous move).
catch22: Once again White leaves a potential cutting point behind. You should only do so when there's a clear benefit. I don't think that is the case here, so better to just play P10.
catch22: Better for Black to play at N6, and at least get some compensation (see variaton).
daveadams: At this point (probably well before) it's clear my J15 group needs eyes, but I tried to connect instead.  catch22: You indeed have to make sure that it does not die because that should guarantee a win. Ensuring the group lives is not difficult as long as you realise that M18 (or moves nearby) are sente. If Black does not respond, White G17 kills the group at the top.  By the way, it's amazing how the game has turned around after your invasion at R3.Your two weak stones have transformed into a monsterous group, that destroyed most of Black's territory and made a lot of points itself.
catch22: Not good. Black should attack the white group to stand any chance at all, e.g. by playing at N14.
catch22: Not good either. Just play at N14. It is much better shape. It for instance helps to protect against Black M15. This is quite a vital point. Black L15 next would take away all eye shape in the center.
daveadams: Should have just connected. Instead I was being greedy/overconfident that even if I got cut off I could manage two eyes here.  catch22: Indeed. All you need to do is connect, and you have a sure win.
This play drove home how bad my shape was.
catch22: This is very poor shape. Black should have just played N14.
daveadams: Okay I see now that M13 would have connected. Duh.  catch22: :-)
catch22: First play L16. See variation.
daveadams: I'm not sure how I missed that I was getting cut. I thought I had one more move to make an eye. Too bad for white!  catch22: Yes, you're giving Black the chance to get back into the game.
daveadams: Turns out the way black chose to cut was bad. this is part of why I managed to win. Black K16 is better. I suppose he was trying to save a move to keep me from connecting around P16?  catch22: Black was maybe just being too clever. He should indeed simply have cut at K16. As it is, his stones at the top are still not out of danger yet.
catch22: Best to simply play at G17. You will still win the capturing race by one move.
daveadams: Probably should have played tenuki in here instead of forcing it. I was hoping I could make eyes, but I hadn't read it out. It was hopeless  catch22: Tenuki? What? Are you crazy? ;-) Just play P19 and you've got your two eyes. See variation.
daveadams: Giving up on my M17 group I go for some yose moves hoping to catch up some.  catch22: What? Still too premature. You can still live easily. See variation.
catch22: Black apparently is equally confused about the status at the top.
catch22: These last two moves were bad. They only take a few points. Not enough to lose sente.
daveadams: So here's where I manage to save myself. Black played very poorly, though. I should have been easy to kill.  catch22: Well, I think it is fair to say that both players entirely misread the situation at the top. :-)  Had the white group at the top right been alive, there would be no way for Black to save his stones.
daveadams: Okay, white hasn't seen the chance up top yet.
daveadams: Here we go.
catch22: Black has a stronger response. See variaton.
daveadams: Totally wasted moves here by black.
daveadams: I had one more move, but this was sente I guess.  catch22: It doesn't really matter. The game is over now.
catch22: Playing N1 instead is worth two points instead of just one.
daveadams: Black shouldn't have been playing these dame at this point.  catch22: Indeed, there are still points on the board.
catch22: C4 is still worth a point, this isn't.
daveadams: I gave these up rather than spend time reading out if I could live.  catch22: That's a bit complacent. You are needlessly giving away eight points, and nearly lost the game after all. This is not difficult to read out. See variation.
rs220675 [2k]: hi
chunholee [1k]: hi,re
I can't say this isnt a good move but I just feel S9 is 1 spot too far.  You still had a good chance to attack after though.
rs220675: Do you like the marked black stone or is it better to play this move on line 17 because of the white marked stone? I just wanted to put as much pressure on the white invaders as possible since because of the marked white stone there isn't much potential to build territory by just expanding anyway.  When you attack white you probably want to build into the bottom right and centre. I wouldn't see you making much in top because of K16. If you played lower I think it would have defeated the purpose of why you contacted in the first place in this situation.
This move just helps you fix the weakness you had. You should thank white. :P
Odd placement by white I think.
rs220675: After reviewing the game myself I don't like this pushing move here. I'd like to play at "A" now.  1. Do you agree? 2. After "A" white will certainly jump out somehow. Should black try to secure the area around R17, push white aggressively or can black even play somewhere else. Maybe you can give me a sequence here, just that I get a feel. I often have problems with weak groups. Either I push too hard or too weak, either I'm too impatient or too patient. I just have no timing.  Pushing white then attacking isn't as bad as you think though finding new ways to attack without giving white as much is a great way of improving. The push here helps your attack a lot actually.
You have a chance to still attack white he isnt alive yet.
You are already pincered when you play here so you can't think of getting off easy.
I think this lets you off too easily but then you tried to do much more. Some ideas shown.
rs220675:  1. Is this move ok or are there better moves? 2. Can you show me a sequence where black can settle quickly?  This created a bad situation for you. If white wasnt on top as well then this move could of done much better.
rs220675: After studying this I came to the conclusion that white can live inside and black has two weak groups. That looks freaking bad for black...do you agree?  Black is in big trouble.
rs220675: Can one say that the white group is dead for sure locally?  I read a seki at this point.
rs220675: Is this the best move?  You can try capping since the right is what you want to make into territory. The bottom is small now since white played N3.
rs220675: Here we go again: How does one fight a weak group. I certainly messed it up again by play contact the next move and make my opponent stronger. After reviewing the game I'd like to play at "A" or even "B".  1. Are that the right moves? 2. How should black exploit the white weak stones? Can you give me a short sequence how you would have played and what would have been your strategy behind it?  Well they're different ideas depending on how you want to attack.  You might even try to kill part or all of white here. "A" is a good forcing move to cut but when you do cut it leaves a weakness.
I can see you want to build your right but this is a bad way to do it. :P  Not sure why white didnt hane next though.
Free move for you.
It's not a good sign when you're attacking and you end up in gote fixing your weakness.
rs220675: Here I was afraid that my top black group could be in trouble, so I played at R17.  1. After reviewing I think my top group is alive and white can't take away two eyes in the corner (so that my group would be weak). Is that right? 2. If it's right, where should one play instead?  You can always get eyes later. You still have space to jump out plus jumping out helps eliminate some of whites moyo which will be building soon.
rs220675: Here I looked at the board and thought: "Crap :), white is building a big moyo and I have no potential to invade or reduce". R17 seemed already to give me great disadvantage.  1. How do you see the situation here for black? 2. What moves would you have played here?  From here on feel free to point out the heaviest mistakes. I don't have detailed questions from here on since I certainly should concentrate on fuseki to avoid mistakes that only bring me in situations like that.
This contact play is helping white but I summed up this before.
No need to capture, though it looks nice. :P  I end the comments here. Some of the game left is pretty big but that was reductions mistakes, dieing when trying to caputure, etc.
game over here.
I'm not sure I like this choice of Joseki for black. Again, i'm not strong enough to call your move a real mistake, but I wouldn't like to play this way. My reasoning is: this variation builds strength facing the middle/down the left hand side. Because of the solid white group on the left, I think i would play differently.
This is not the book continuation, I think i would play as in the variation.
A: Would a more solid move, like H16, be better?  I think this is the right move
This is horrid shape. :-(
A: Any better move to protect the left side?  Allowing white to cap the 2 stones at F12 is a bit painful, i think, although this stone does defend it a bit.
A: Attacking from the upper side, like O17, would be a better move?  on the left, D10 looks very tempting, but if you want to take the initiative elsewhere, then i think perhaps the most important thing is to defend the 4 stones on top. The way you play, lets you do so quite naturally, so it looks pretty good. Alternatively, i would just play L16/17
I would prefer to play at L17 but this is definitely the right sort of move to be making
nice attack
this is a bit of a cheeky move from black, since it doesn't really defend anything and the group is under attack. I would be tempted to ignore it for now.
If you're going to play P17, then O15 makes no sense. Letting black cut straight through is very bad for white
The two triangled white groups are separated by a connected black group. This is very bad. It's ok if both black and white are cut - it's a fair exchange, but cutting and staying connected yourself is very strong. If black plays D10, it is similar.   http://senseis.xmp.net/?SplitShape
is this really needed?
a move like the triangle would be very big, but this is very nice, too.
Cutting at D10, would lead to a fight, but preventing the escape of the black stones on the left indirectly makes the middle white stones stronger. The D10 position looks very strange to my eyes.
Maybe white can ignore this move and continue to jumpt into the right?
This next sequence is a bit funny.
i'd still prefer to cut!
A: Too deep? Extending the territory in the right side (O6) could be better?  Any where on the line netween L11 and H5 is probably playable, say J7 or K9.   Another option might be to play M10 to build up the right in exchange for the middle.
L: Is this the right direction, or should I have tried to secure territory or even tenuki?  i's going to be tough to capture the black stone becuase it has two escape routes - down and  to the right. Black has more potential territory on the right, so perhaps it would be better to try to attack this stone from the other side, in order to reduce black's territory on the right?  I guess i would think of moves around A and B as miai in defending the black stone- white can get one, and then black will take the other. The area around A is more useful for Black to take territory, so i think it's more valuable for white to take that area than B, which will end up as neutral points for either colour.
L: Black's territory on the right seems very prospective, so I thought I need to invade somehow. And was also an attempt to keep B stones disconnected.  Good idea, but it's perhaps a move too late, and a bit too deep.
L: As black was strong I was trying to play lightly.  Good idea, perhaps this is a bit too deep too.
A: I don't know if I this is correct. I played this way because I thought I was behind in territory and this was the only way to win the game...
L: Not so sure about the sequence from here on.  It's tough to see a good way out. I think the deep invasions are obviously the root of this fight, and that they probably needed to be shallower.
L: Here is the beginning of the semeai, I wonder if I could do something better. Or even he.
L: As I realized I'd lose the semeai, I thought I should at least secure territory in sente, but later I noticed that this position had the ko threats I needed to win the game.  Yes the right thing to do is to go and play elsewhere. Black may always miss a loss of liberties on the middle stones, andthen you can come back and rip him off.
A: Unnecessary?  yup
L: I don't think that was a good choice, but I'm not really sure how to proceed. Should I start on B3  or any other position?  This is big, B3 is big, and there's a big spot somewhere about S15. I think i would play the top right, but actually B3 is probably the biggest, because it has a bigger followup move.
so black got the other two big spots. I guess because B3 was sente, it should have been played first :-)
A: I didn't read well enough and this became too dangerous. After this move, have I done a big mistake to let this turn a ko?  well you could always let the white stone connect through, more defensively, but i think white played pretty well to force a ko. I think perhaps you could have prevented it, but i'm not sure..
A: I decided the only I could something was to start a ko here.
L: Now the right group would be come in handy.  Yup
A: Obviously missed W234...
L: I think that was all. Thanks for the review in advance.  A: Thanks to the reviewer for the review.
F: I think you should continue at H16. See variation
F: attacking is  a good idea, but this is not the right point. See variation
Myabe E9 wasnt good enough to push the chase. I wanted to use my thickness but wasnt completely sure of how to do it.  F: a suggestion in the variation
F: This is completely wrong. You are strong on  the upper side. You should chase black to this side. Now you're letting him escape to the lower side.
F: This is too loose. Black can easily escape now. See variation
F: Black should play on C4 tot connect. See variation
F: This is good for white
F: First you have to seal of the group, before you try to kill it. Variation
F: This is maybe too passive. See variation
F: Black can escape, so this move is useless
I finally get the chase but then I think I wasnt aggressive enough
F: Very bad, this only strenghtens black
F: Now you have to take care of your two groups
pure mistake here :(
Should I have kept attacking instead of doing a corner inclosure?  F: Black is already quite strong, so keeping on is probably not good.  You might even get in problems with one of your groups. So this move is good. Another idea would be to attack the black stones in the lower left
F: Rather vague, what is this move doing?
F: Good
F: First keep black sealed in ! You're letting him escape on the lower side. Variation
F: You still shoule pressure black on the left side first. Look at the variation and see the difference with the real game.
maybe I shouldnt have been more passive. But I think i missjudged the situation  F: This is OK, but attacking immediately is also a possibility.
F: Black escapes easily now
here a mistake from me. I forgot to read it out
I know i got luky here. L 11 should have cut white off and game over Maybe playing at the bottom from my part wasnt the best thing to do. I should have gone to the center faster.
F: By saving your groups, you're back in the game.
F: Small, the marked points are bigger
randyg [15k]: hi gg
jvcn [13k]: hi you too
RS: I see you like jumping into the 3-3 point. However, as you saw here it does not work because of Wc14. If Wc14 were at c10, *then* the 3-3 invasion would be good. The reason you jump into the 3-3 point is to take away the coner, but because of Wc14, W can cut you off by playing d17 as he did in the game. I would prefer the variation.
RS: See variation after W's next move.
RS: See variation.
RS: See variation.
RS: Hmmmm, this move tells me you are worried about W getting territory or too much of it on the left. One of the ground rules for go is to try too split your opponent's groups, which is easy for W to do here by playing e7. You will then have 2 weak groups. A weak group without any eyes takes 20 points away from your score. Two of them means -40 points. I know you later connected them but that was only because W did not take advantage of the situation. See the variation for one idea.
RS: With this move, what you are saying to W is, "Please kill either the f3 group or the d8 group. You choose." I'm not sure that's what you wanted, but that's what you said. I believe d2 would have been better.  My desire would be to make life for my f3 group in sente and use Bd8 to reduce W as much as possible which is why I would play d2.
RS: Try 'a'.
RS: Ok, a little fighting advice. In the lower left you have 7 groups. Even if you conside groups 1, 4 & 5 as one group, you still have 5 separate groups. Try not to have so many. So many groups means a lot of cutting points for W to cause you problems as you saw later in the game.  Next, count the liberties of each group. 1 has 2 liberties; 2, 1 lib; 3, 4; 4, 4; 5, 3; 6, 4, and 7, 3.   The magic number concerning a group's liberties is 5. Anything less then this, and warning bells should go off in your head, unless you have read it out *exactly*. 5 may seem like a lot, but in a fight, liberties can disappear quickly. So, your last move, 7, should have been a simple extension to c5. See variation.
RS: See variation.
RS: Good! This is a huge move, but as you saw your lower left group is weak without Be4. You will have to go back and connect here.
RS: Good! Many would try to save the single stone. You saw the bigger picture.
RS: Now would be a good time for Be4.
RS: Good! Makes your wall stronger towards your upper right shimari. Well done.
RS: Good! You're direction of play is correct.
RS: 'A' may be better.
RS: Ok, you're trying to get a huuuuge moyo AND W is cooperating. Bh2 is no good since you have to seal off your moyo at k6 or L7. Stay with your good strategy of making a huge moyo. Just realize W will invade, so plan as much as possible how to kill him.
RS: I think 'A' is better since it connects your stones better and isolates W's 2 marked stones.
RS: See variation.
RS: 'A' is better.
RS: Yes, good move.
RS: You see 'a'? W can play there and, at least, reduce you a lot. It is best not to have such a diagonal jump between stones if at all possible. I believe 'A' works.
RS: Opps, 'A' is the move.
RS: This is a bad move by W. See variation.
RS: Just for your information, this is a completely wasted move by W. His shape is unconditionaly alive. He has given you a free move. When this happens think for a long time on your next move to get the most out of W's mistake. For example,
RS: The right thinking, but X would do the same and give you a bit more territory.
RS: I'm sure you've seen that your f7 group is in danger. See the variations.
RS: Opps. Of course, h7.
RS: Good move! Again W wasted a move. Unfortunately, your group is dead without Wg4, but you played a good move.
RS: Remember in this kind of an invasion, all you have to do is keep W from getting 2 eyes. You don't have to actually take his stones off the board. With such an invasion, W will want to move towards the biggest empty area which is towards the top. Therefore ...
RS: Contact move like Bk17 give W a chance to comlicate things. Try the variation.
randyg [15k]: sometimes i think the harder i try at this game the worse i play!!  RS: Yes, I know *exactly* what you mean. For ideas to kill W, look at the next several variations.
jvcn [13k]: i've lost plenty and may still lose this  RS: Remember, just keep him from getting 2 eyes. The cut is not necessary now. See variation.
RS: See variation.
RS: Sorry, Randy, I think after this W move, he lives which means he won the game.  I don't find any way to kill him. You *had* to kill him in order to win.
RS: Since m18 is a false eye, this stone is not necessary.
RS: 'A' is better. Those 2 W stones have nowhere to go.
RS: Good!
RS: See variation.
jvcn [13k]: thx randyg [15k]: gg thx i just am falling aprt today! jvcn [13k]: it's not rated jvcn [13k]: relax  RS: Your strength in this game was seeing the bigger picture and not trying to save every stone.   Your biggest weakness is fighting by have too many small groups involved in the same fight (See move 37). You do this about 10 times. In a fight, if you have 3 groups, one or two will die. Try to have only 1 or 2 groups in the same fight.  I hope it was helpful. Any questions? E-mail me.
Often, white responds at P6 which prevents black from linking up.  See variation for why that works.
Since white didn't play P6, I wonder if black should play R5 ?  not sure.
Is J17 better then the standard A-C  J17 looks ok since it makes a base and deprives white of one.
Do I need to answer here, or can I just let the group be and let it live small?   I'm wondering if black S15 or black Q16 is better.  If black doesn't play Q16, it is white's sente.
I think white maybe should extend instead of hane..  I'm not sure though !
Is it okey to attack now, or will this create to many problems?
This move seems to help white get stronger.  How about playing N14 right away instewad of P12 ?   That splits white into two unsettled groups so black can attack one of them.   The idea is for black to try to get strong without strenthening either white group.
Does this help white more then black, since I help white with the A aji?  Black is using up is own liberties so should probably not do this.  Maybe N14 still better than Q13.
what about s11 ?  See variations.
Seems like black should answer the peep to keep possible attack on white
This is gote. But I felt that I needed to protect my group, any thoughs?
I do not think white need this stone. Im happy getting sente
I wanted to enclose white, but this way I help him getting 2eyes, is this bad? Sould I let the group stay alone for the time?     How do you decide whether ti give up a stone at R11 or play double hane instead with R9 ?  It takes a bit of reading but is worth studying...
black is making large center so should white play P8 instead of R6 ?
thid white move doesn't look so good.  See variation.
Felt I had a "superior" start, so I played defensive.
black lost the chance
P4 bigger?  P4 doesn't look so big since the R6 stones are now strong, so white could answer P4 at K3, promising a base at either N3 or G3.
black shouldn't let white get too large a corner here.  How about answering this move at P2 or P4 instead of O3 ?
white got a large corner
I didn't see a black threat here.
Now I felt he just started to do things to hopefully live. And to make me do a mistake
instead of M10, what happens if black N9 ?  I've played out some variations    In general, black is strong up top and weaker down below.  So black should be helping the lower stones.  So instead of M10, if you don't do N9 either, how about M4, just to quickly make the black stones safe.  The safer the are quickly, the less white can make shape by threatening them.  I've shown some M4 variations.
instead of N10, how about L10 ?
black is letting white complicate the situation
it seems like black is allowing white too easy a time in making shape in black's shere of influence
This created a very big fight.  Maybe H2 instead of H4 to get settled quickly at bottom.
sometimes J2 is better because it removes a white liberty.
Instead of this atari, it looks like white saves his bottom stones by using the other atari.  See variations.
just a mistake.  if white has lost the battle here, then instead of J1, making life in the midddle is most important.   Perhaps white L6 or K9.
Big mistake, with N2 I could live simple without much of a fight.  Yes, I agree.
From what I found out, doing this or connect at O1 is not much of a different.
Does black have to lose all these stones ?
I lost becouse of a mistake, But I felt I was still ahead in the game   Is this H1 needed ?
Started to feel that white just wanted to hope for my mistakes  Besides white capturing large black group, just the fact that white lived inside black's sphere of influence is a huge gain for white.
Black H12 lets K12 escape.  How about black K10 instead ?
However, from white's point of view, if black D10 makes it too difficult to invade, what if white plays c11 to maximize possible base at either c8 or b14 next ?
Started to feel again he just wanted to live by my mistakes   Instead of black C4, how about black B4 ?
B4 better?
why take the 1 unimportant stone ?  How about G9 instead ?  I don't see white getting 2 eyes in that case.
white has two doors, one at
For white's point of view, this F15 doesn't really head towards eye-making ground since there's black stones all around.  I would think just playing the 3-3- point might be the best, to make quick life inside black's potential territory.
I believe the important goal for black here is to try to kill the upper left white stones.   Probably a move in the corner is best, such as 3-3 or c16.
what if black plays c16 instead ?
living here is a huge gain for white   However, this is the time for black to count the score and see what is needed to win.
see variation
maybe instead of c19, black should have drawn back to e18
instead of this move, what happens if c17 ?  see variation
note that black could pay a ko at e19 also.
end of analysis by ericosman@rcn.com .  Thanks for sharing i with me.  [7-dec-2008]
This game started good, but ended really bad.
- If you would like to play for territory and solidity (instead of influence), you should play on the third line here.
This move was maybee to offensive. Better p17?  - It does look start a fight, but if you had gotten the ladder the move looks ok.
here I missed to build a ladder
-
- Also a mistake by white
- Maybe a little reserved.
- Good.
- The idea is good but a 2 space jump is very weak, and there are more urgent points, think about C13, H4.
- This looks too compressed.
- This stone does not do enough.
- Mistake by white.
- Sorry for the messy variation, I don't think a 3-3 invation works here. Hmm CGoban should have a remove option.  - Please do check the node with the triangle further down this variation.
In the end he will get the right corner down there. have there been any chance right now to prevent that?
- Here you almost had what would most likely be a winning move.
Is there a better way to stop him? I lost a bit of control here.
here i think i was much to hesitant. in the end i will loose the e14 group
- I'm not sure how to profitably save these stones, but remember that this is all due to no immediately capturing the F15 stone. Remember to capture stones that separate your groups if you can so that you can keep you stones connected.
- Not important!
- Not necessary either.
- Neutral point.
san ren sei was my standard opening for a while.  JJ: I love this opening, I tried other ones but is the one i like most. I think I'll be able to give you some advices about it ;)  The first one is that this opening is used to make big moyos and a lot of influence upon the center of the board (corners aren't really too important with this kind of opening), so if you like moyos, this is your opening ^_^
JJ: Standard attack
JJ: Standard response
JJ: etc
JJ: First mistake!!  After you played K16, the correct direction of play was Q17 (see the variation for better explanation).   If you had played nirensei (only 2 starpoints) then this would be the correct move.
JJ: Another mistake, P16 can hurt you a lot
JJ: Bad move from white. It strengthen your position
JJ: Even worst for white, he already was alive and crawls on the second line. He got only 1 point of territory...
JJ: And you at least 6 points of influence
JJ: I'll put some variations that I think are better responses to this attack
For the sake of practice I try as many answers to keima kakari as possible.  JJ: This is a GREAT MISTAKE. You can only make this move when you already have a stone about C10 or D10, ¿ok? (See variation) in any other case you are helping your oponent, and you are not reinforcing your corner as you could think, because later in the game whita still can invade it.
JJ: Good for white
JJ: Yose move. Your corner still can be invaded
Bad timing, i assume.  JJ: Not exactly bad timing, the problem was C15, after that black can't wait a fair result.
JJ: What an ugly shape empty triangles are ^^U
JJ: Don't push him from behind, you are alive, so... tennuki! :D
JJ: Little points for black. That white wall is worth a lot.
JJ: Bad move, you better jump to the center
JJ: Be careful, a stone is only a stone
JJ: Bad for white (he should punish here)
Where on the upper side my choices were very conscious, on the lower side it seems all a bit irrational, don't you agree?  JJ: Well, the only "irrational group" seems to be the C8 one, the others are not bad
JJ: This hurts a lot!
JJ: And this too!
JJ: Don't tenuki now! ^^U
JJ: OMG! XD
From here on it's mainly about fighting for some center territory...  JJ: Good, but you could save some portion of your moyo by playing N11
JJ: Very small :(
JJ: You shouldn't have allowed this :(
JJ: They are only 3 stones!!
JJ: Ouch!
JJ: ARGH!! I really hate empty triangles! ^^U
As far any sense for endplay is concerned: what are my biggest mistake, or my opponents' for that matter?
JJ: Two ones with only a stone, OMG OMG ^^U
JJ: Try not to make any gote moves, ok?
JJ: ?
JJ: You really like this shape, don't you? ^^U
JJ: are you in atari? then don't lose sente, ok?
JJ: Don't let your enemy guide your moves, ok? You weren't in atari!
I probably would have waited until later to play this move.  At present there are too many obvious responses that are painful for white.  Black could play N14 for instance, and then based on your response either attack O16 or O13 group.  This move would be better saved until later when either the O16 stone wouldn't be putting itself into such a precarious position, or the O13 stones were a little stronger, or there was another white stone near L13 to make running difficult for B.  In any case, I would have played an approach in the lower right at this point, probably O3.  If for some reason you hate O3 you could also try a moyo move around K14.
I don't like this move now.  There are bigger moves on the board: O3, J15, C14.  You can't kill that group at present.  Come back to it later when nearby stones have changed.
This move means you will try to kill or at least manipulate the black stones.  Otherwise it's not worth saving this stone (just a few points).  But be careful - can black run out right into the middle of your territory and/or live easily in the corner? If so, don't play this move yet.  Play a bigger move elsewhere as I've noted several times already.  All those moves are still more important than this one.
Now you're too late to make a good invasion in lower right.  This 3x3 invasion withO4 already present can only be successful as a ko. Better would have been to play D17 to kill G17 stone and take your territory in the corner.
Your invasion of the corner was a disaster.  It's a good idea for you to study the ko invasion and try it in some games to learn about it, but overall you were just too late.  You have some ok stones in the center as partial compensation, but the moyo is not strong enough to compensate for all the territory black has secured in the corner, and your upper left is still weak.
This move is very aggressive.  You can only play like this if you read it out carefully.  Maybe it's ok, maybe not.  By the following sequence, you show that you had not read it out well.  If you're not going to read it out well, you should play safely (E16).
Now you have lost a stone and black got a huge territory and is totally safe.  Even worse, you have a very ugly cutting point left at D15.  You should try some alternative moves to E15 (try F17) just to see what happens, and to consider whether E17 was a good move or not.
HUGE opportunity lost here.  You should have attacked the big black group.  This was your chance. See alternate sequance at move 95.
Very painful for white to have black cut through like this.  N9 was not the best move.  You should have blocked at M11.
I don't like this move P4.  You make O3 much stronger.  You should have saved the aji for later, or attacked at M3 directly.
I would have invaded at C3, as it is a little bigger.  You just help black secure the corner.
Maybe G4 would have been better here.
this move was probably unecessary by black.  in any case, if black is unable to read it out, he should have played A3 or A4 which both make the corner much clearer but also attack left side.
again black makes an error.  G6 would have been better.
I think this was bad.  nevertheless black also erred in response: black should have connected at J11 then advanced to K9 area to destroy w moyo, potentially kill J10, and if not, b makes life with N18 in sente.
yet another unnecessary move by black.  this move is worth absolutely nothing, zero, zilch.  H18 is huge.  N18 is big. B5 is ok. This F8 is horrible.  The recent sequence of 10 moves, black made 3-4 major errors, and between these 3 errors you made up for the handicap.
empty triangle.  Bad.  You should have played K10, which would have given you a chance later to make 1 extra point of territory while also saving the L9 stone.
you should have played here B6 instead of D6.  it would have been sente and very big.
not very careful reading by you.  K18 better.
terrible.  You overlooked a big move at L19 to play this move of almost no value.
this move is worth minus one point and you miss the chance to play a good move at E6.
This seemed bigger than responding to F3  *C6 would also be a pro move, a matter of style I suppose.
I thought blocking on this side would work better with my upper left stone  * those two stones are also flexible enough that tenuki is also possible (I saw Gu Li do it recently). two moves in upper right for w more valuable than two moves by b in lower right.
I didn't expect this
* this result not so great for w. Leaves g3 as a very big move. can tenuki on move 10 leaving two light stones, or pursue to joseki in the variation
I didn't want him to settle his stone easily and negate the influence of my lower left group.  *I think this was a good choice
I don't know joseki for this position, but it turned out ok
This was a hard decision. Extending around R11/R12 is normal, I think, but the S18 stone seems to make the group a little unstable. On the other hand, any other move would leave the group even more open to attack. Is there another sequence that would have been more appropriate here instead of R17 and following?
I wanted expand the upper right in order to make a better base, but approaching at r5 would leave a big gap around r8. I expected black to play either r5 or n3. Since the bottom left group is also low, I thought this would be good for white, but...  *this leaves w too low and thin on the right, too optimistic to hope b make corner territory
..black did this
I considered attaching at q9, but thought black would build thickness in the middle and make the game hard for white.
*This weakens r7 unnecesarily, while the large group still has no real eyes.
This kept white's nose  in the middle at the risk of huring the r7 stone
This was probably not the worst move black could have played, but I didn't know how to treat r7 now.
This move took a while to choose. I decided to abandon r7 and either settle on the lower side or build a moyo in the middle while forcing black to protect the corner.
But he counterattacked, to I tried to take the corner.
*this is greedy of b. should defend corner.
*looks like bad shape, especially since encouraging the descent to s7 is not advisable
I won by one liberty, but now black has sente and the white's upper right stones need some help. They managed to survive, but black gained a lot during the attack.
perhaps should have simply been q12?  *I don't like q12
abandoning the p10 stones in order to run out to the center
The white stones have survived, but black ran into my area of influence on the left. Now I'm behind and couldn't catch up.
Here is my first question.  Here I try to make white wall ineffective, but I think maybe I should play one of the following.  could you please help me here?  klin: You can play at C11 or D11.
I don't know the joseki here, but I think this is playable.  klin: This is playable, but may not be a good choice.  See my later comment. (Learning basic joseki is a neseccary step to improve.)
klin: At this moment, C13 has no threat to the white corner.  That's one reason F18 was not a good choice.
klin: L4 is to close to your own influence.  Could play at O7.  Also, with the existence of R2, the territory on the lower side is small.
At the beginning I wanted to play N17, w M16, then b K17, but I don't know why I played here... what should I do here?  klin: O17, N18, or K17 is also possible.
klin: The B's attacking sequrnce let W live easily with large territory.  L16 could play at N18 or O17.
klin: W O18 makes living and also is large.
In retrospect, I think this move is a mistake, since it make white gains wall.  where should I play here?  klin: B has lost a lot territory on the top and has to gain some back. Q12 is playable.  The problems are the following up steps.
klin: R13 bad, should play at Q11.  If you can learn this kind of fighting procedure, you will improve your ranking.
klin: B gained too little.
klin: L13 a meaingless move.
Another bad move. the result is bad for me.  What should I do here?  klin: This move is OK.  But B5 sente, should play first.  Also, B play at O7 and O9 may get a sente.  After all that, then play H7. No comment after this point.
do you think this move is bad/slow?
here is why I won I think
yukilin: thanks
[Y] Is this move necessary?  It seems to me a wasted ko threat, but I felt it's better if there is no ko because my opponent will need fill 3 liberties to kill this group.  No, simply play the A to D sequence.  The outcome is the same, but you have an extra ko threat and better aji.  For example, without the game move, E is forcing.
Extend to at least A.  Black has the option to force at B later.  Whether white responds at C or D, the game move is too close to white's power.
This is bad for black.  He should have played at A.
I prefer A.  That way black's B is not sente.
A is better.  Please see variation.
A gives white a better shape, cutting down the impact of black's pincer around B.
You lost a move here.  When black played at A, he covered his cut in sente.  Just jump to B to keep up the pressure.
[Y] Where should this move be?  D7 E7 then H8?  Yes, that gives a better outcome.  Please see variation.
[Y] I have a sick feeling in my stomache for losing this point.
This is unreasonable.  White needs to reinforce his lower side group.  It's true that even if black plays one more move he may not be able to kill white's group.  However, by attacking he can make profit during the process.  For example, black at A will seal white in and develop center power in sente.  That kind of move is too good for black.
This move put even more pressure on white's group.  As you played out the joseki on the right side, you needed to think about the outcome and how it affected the left group.
[Y] Any other moves that's more elegant?  This helps black to solidify his upper right side.  Play at A.  Then B and C are miai.
[Y] It's gote is really not a good exchange for me.  You need to reinforce this group, otherwise black has a chance for a double attack.
[Y] Is this move the right timing?  I though black would go for the attachwith j6 or something.  Althougth the game move was big, attacking the lower white group was more urgent.  Black should be able to gain sente after the attack and come back here to defend.
Play at A.  Black doesn't have time to cut at B.  Please see variations.
[Y] Extremly happy with this outcome.
Push at A.  Please see variation.
A connects the groups.
[Y] All of sudden this group is in trouble.  Defend at A.  Please see variation.
[Y] Black's fate is sealed I think at this point. Thanks for any comments.
A is better for black.
ngm86652 has resigned the game.
pet:  A - D are more or less possible moves, see variations  A: good move, if b answers B, see variation;  B: ok, not perfect, but I'd played it also (without this analysis)  :-))  C: ok, common problem is, if w can't fight the ko (as allways in the beginning), this move is just ok, because w has to defend, see var.  D: possible, but B is better shape i think
Ted: I'm not certain about this move.  I didn't think either atari would be a good idea, however.  Should I have played S5 instead?  pet: Don't worry, I'm not certain too.
perhaps for b better A instead M4
Ted: I have a feeling this might have been a slow move.  I seem to recall a comment from another game I had reviewed in which the reviewer mentioned regarding a similar joseki that a move like R9 and a move in the corner are miai, but I can't tell that this position is quite the same.  It also looks to me that Black would get a lot of territory if I allowed him to play here and just take a few points in the corner instead.  pet: correct, it's slow, but if b moves somewhere around, it might be big for b then (this shows a bit greedy opinion), so better play elsewhere; locally R9 is definitly to narrow, should be at least at R10, even R11 - R13 is to consider, as far as the w group is allready alive (R2 allways possible).
Ted: As it is, Black gets an excellent position in the top right. pet: R11 is a bit far, so as an answer i'd think about D or E. Over all the corner (A,B,C) was a better idea, as D or E should be keept in reserve (smaller) for later.   A: is the usual approach B: if the ladder is for w, B is ok C: special purpose (emphasise the top and looses some points in the corner)
Ted: I honestly don't know where I should have played.  This, P17, K17, and C10 all seem plausible to me, but I couldn't give any explanation on why one of them might be better than another.
Ted: I get the feeling this isn't quite right, but I had no idea how to proceed to make certain this groups was going to get its two eyes, *and* make certain Black wasn't going to end up with a huge profit.  pet: this move is not sente, see var starts in two moves. so it's too slow, the joseki says A instead
Ted: I thought I was OK on the top here.
Ted: This looked like the biggest part of the board still open. pet: right, but w allready a bit behind, because b got p11;  1) r9 was slow and should have been at r11  2) w was again too slow to punish b for the risky r11 afterwards  watch out for gote moves and avoid them, if possible!
pet: good idea
Ted: I didn't think my stones in the lower left were any worse than Black's group in the top right.  Apparently, I was wrong.  pet: g3 is well placed, there is still some balance in the game, b is ahead, but w is still in (as far as kyus playing)
pet: A is normal  in this case perhaps B is even better
pet: now F4 is very big, and reverse sente (mean if b plays F4, w has to answer, so w F3 is a must)
Ted: I had absolutely no idea what to do next.  This move was completely unexpected to me, but even worse, I had no idea what *Black* was going to do on his next move.  How am I supposed to read far enough ahed to figure out how to get a good position when my opponent plays moves that are a surprise to me instead of what I read out?  pet: right you wonder about the difficult things here, F4 is still urgent and might be still the best move
Ted: I thought the stones above needed help to make certain they'll get their two eyes.  I don't see any way they'll connect to anything.  pet: with been behind, this is allmost like resign, for b now F4 is allready enough, without any danger
Ted: I didn't expect this movie, either.  I figured Black would try to connect D6 to the group at the bottom.  pet: I wouldn't expect it too. :-)) with F4 b can easy win, this now leads to a fight;  b should avoid unclear fights if ahead.
pet: C4 ok, but now F4 is still missing
pet: gote, bad move
Ted: This was obviously an attempt to make certain Black's gorup on the left couldn't connect to anything or get its two eyes.  pet: a very good move here; congratulations :-))
Ted: This was probably a mistake.  I think I should have played F4 here, but I was worried about Black playing the monkey jump at A8 and preventing this group from getting two eyes.  pet: you're right, still F4 would be nice, but now D8 is urgent
pet:  finally :-))
pet: lucky you
Ted: Now I'm really in trouble.I have no clue how to save the stones at G6, and sacrificing them doesn't look like a viable option.  Just a few short moves ago, I thought I had a nice moyo, but obviously not now.
Ted: At least I saved the group at G6, although this had consequences later on.
pet: bad b move
pet: well done Ted :-))
Ted: I had the distinct feeling that I was well behind.  What Black has on the bottom is just as much as what I've got on the top; what Black has in the top left is at least as much as I've got in the bottom right; and what Black has in the top right is well more than what I have in the bottom left and the few points in the left center.  I figured that if Black could attack me at D6, then surely I could attack Black too and have it work.  pet: again i'd to say you are right, w can do here something,  P14 ecatly is not the move i'd play here.  I'd try A-D, preferring C or D, B i've read in a book is ok, but can explain really, A would be a bit of an overplay, but w is behind so ...
pet: now the gam is over, b has more terretory ...
Ted: Something doesn't look quite right here.  pet: I'd try with D16 and then E14, G16 as you played was far too defensive, you've nothing too loose in this game
pet: what are you fearing? see var with G15 instead!
pet: the idea now should be to seperate b groups, not worry about some stones (in this caser high and light stones p14 eg.) I would try F11, but it might be too tough
Ted: I had to try to figure out a way to make certain my stones in the P14 area were going to survive
Ted: This was a desperate attempt to try to kill *something*.  I figured that killing the group to the right of F14 was impossible, but at least while making Black protect that, I could take the profit of killing the D12 stone.
Ted: It was here that I suddenly realized with horror that my group around C10 was split off from everything else.  The moral of the story is not to expect attacks that work for everybody else to work for you too, unless you can read far enough ahead to see that they'll work.  But again, how do you read ahead when your opponent consistently plays unexpected moves?
Ted: I didn't see this move coming at all. pet: b B7 is the best move, and can't kill, but gets a seki
Ted: I was guessing at how to save my group here  Doing more life and death problems might have helped more with this group, but there are still other problems elsewhere on the board.
pet: better F9 and get life
Ted: I was hoping against hope that Black would miss this move.
pet: locally J12 is good, see vars
Ted: I tried a few more attacks, but none of them were going to work, so I resigned.  At the time, I figured my group on the left was dead, but I think it's actually "only" seki.  Not that it helps.  I'm still trailing very badly, and would be even if the group on the left were unconditionally alive.  pet: as far as i can see A8 brings your group to life, see var; but still w is behind, but not that much, so r2 instead of q2 would help a bit, but then b a8 makes a real seki.  other important points for w are are: J12 (sente) N18 (endgame, but sente) G2, H1, endgame, sente) C18 (later, gote)  For the whole game I'd say: For me analysing the game it's also a bit surprising how far w is behind now.  Some hints for you might help: 1) Watch out for sente moves, if you feel a slow move near to a living group, think of something else. 2) Sometimes try a cut more than you do, especially if it can happen near your strength 3) You did not loose one stone, but your stones are separated into 4 groups (b has 2 groups-> means half the borderline), sometimes its better to connect or give away some stones   4) In this game your opponent turned out to play quite strong for an 8kyu, i think  I hope i could help you a bit. In the end i'd say this game was interesting, but not easy to review (too many difficult vars). Best wishes for the future Peter
sorry misclick
reid: The big picture starts very early in go.  Here, white has played his first move on the 4-4 which means he's more interested in side and center influence than he is in the corner territory.  But when black played the early shimari with P16, white switched direction.  R5 declares that white is more interested in the right-hand side.  This is a bit inconsistent with his first move, but it is a reasonable reaction to P16.
reid: The corner is big, but taking this move now allows white a chance to use R5 effectively.  Black could also consider playing at A to build on his shimari investment.  Then white has to choose between the upper left corner and the lower right.  If white takes the upper left, black will get B and so the R5 stone won't be very effective.  Please note that I'm not saying that white R5 was bad or that black should play A instead of D16.  Rather, I'm trying to provide some insight into how you can look at the first few moves of the game.  The goal should always be to understand the meanings of the stones so you can make your stones efficient and your opponent's stones inefficient.
reid: R11 is a critical point, and it's good for white to take it now.  Again, that's not to say black has made a mistake yet, but if white did not get this point now, it would probably be a mistake for him.
reid: Here I think is the first real mistake:  as we noted earlier, white R5 is inconsistent with D4.  What that means is there is no good way for white to make these two stones work together to become more effective.  They  really only wok seperately.  So that means black doesn't have to rush to disrupt their cooperation.  So far, black's structure is larger than white's (natural since black has first move), so black should continue to build his structure larger while that option is available.  I'm thinking black A is a better way to make black's stones work together.  White might answer with B or C.  White still needs two moves, a corner shimari (D) plus an extension around E, to make this structure complete.  So black still has time to take F, for example.  Actually, even if white C, black F, white D,  Black G still looks bigger than E.  Black is building on a larger scale, and faster than white.  For these reasons, I feel that P4 is too early.  Here's another way to come to the same conclusion:  when white has R5, reasonable approach moves include P4, D(Q3), H(R3), and perhaps I(P3).  Which should black take now?  I certainly can't say at the moment which one is best.  When it's difficult to choose from several options, that's a good clue that you shouldn't play any of them yet.  Sometime later, after the game has developed some more, it will become obvious that one of these moves is the best move.  Or, white will take gote to defend.  Either of these outcomes is better than playing here too early.
reid: P4, Q3, P3, Q2 are all joseki.  But F3 is not.  Of course, it's not good to follow joseki slavishly, but if you deviate, you should have a good reason and a complete plan.  Normal joseki is to extend to A, but that doesn't seem to be very good in this game.  White has secured a large corner and black is not exactly settled comfortably yet.  Which means that P4 was probably not a good idea (too soon).  P4 and P3 are the first specific case where I think black helped white.
reid: Hmm, white chooses to avoid fighting.  White should take advantage of black's mistake before black gets a chance to fix it!  There is no good reason for white to try to start a new fight with C14.  I think a move like white A would make black very uncomfortable.
reid: However, this is a rather odd way for black to continue.  Black needs to think about how to make P4 and F3 work effectively together.  This is difficult because white has Q2 - any black position on the bottom side is already undercut.  Locally, if black wants to attack the D4 stone, A is the most severe pincer, and B is the next choice.
reid: "when you touch me, you help me".  The natural consequence of a contact move like F4 is that the contacted stone gets to strengthen itself.  White should think carefully here: does he want black to get stronger around G4?  That seems to help black join up with P4.  Perhaps a different contact move would be better:  white A followed by black F4 and then white B.  Now black is rather busy: an invasion around C or D would demonstrate that both black groups (F3 and P3) are heavy.  But black C7 is starting to look a little lonely too.
reid: Wow.  Of course white should extend to A.
reid: Black takes the critical point.
reid: Ahhhh, now black wants everything.  In go, that's a good way to end up with nothing.  How about if black takes the one stone with A?  If white swallows up C7 with C8, black takes a nice big corner with B, white C, black D.  If white defends the corner with B, then black can think about pulling out C7 (although jumping to C9 is a ligher way to get out than C8).  By taking the one stone, black gets excellent eye shape for the F3 group (pon-nuki in the center is woth 30 points).  That makes it much more difficult for white to attack the P3 stones (white doesn't get a splitting attack if one side is already alive or nearly alive).  But when black commits to saving C7, white will be able to control the game.  Black has too many debts he needs to pay off.  My usual rule of thumb is that if I see my opponent has two weak groups on the board, I think I should be able to win (of course, I never have two weak groups - heh, yeah right).  So if you don't want to give your opponent a good strategic opportunity, don't let yourself make more than one weak group at a time.
reid: Again, jumping to A is lighter. And in this specific case, it prevents white from getting a good extension at B.
reid: This time it's black's turn to think about "you touch me, you help me".  Does black want to help the C11/C14 stones live?  Better just to come out with A (which black has to do eventually anyway).  Later, if white doesn't get a chance to strengthen those stones, black may get a nice move like B.  This looks like another case of black helping his opponent.
i thought im doing pretty well here..  reid: Well, I thnk black is still helping white out quite a bit: that corner is looking reasonably large, and black's stones still aren't exactly what I'd call powerful.  But white has left a problem behind.  We'll get to it in a couple of moves.
reid: Now this is very bad for white.  This is an endgame move concerned with only a few points.  At this point of the game, it's much more important to be thinking about life and death, cuts and connections, strength and weakness.  Unless white feels his corner stones are not safe, he should play somewhere else and leave this point for another 150 or two hundred moves.
reid: Ack!!  This is a perfect example of helping your opponent.  White has a weakness in his shape here, but after white connects at B(E8), the weakness is gone.  The black F7 stone does almost nothing for black (no territory and no threat), but white gets to remove his weakness.  Without this exchange, something like black A might be sente (if white tenukis, black B, white C, black F7 and white is sealed into the corner).  That means black can think about building a large-scale moyo with something like D, black E, through white I.  Then black A and white probably needs to connect, so black also gets J.
time to disrupt its shape i think  reid: Looks like A is a better corner probe.  But again, this is pretty much end-game stuff.  There are bigger fish to fry!  B and C for starters.
pretty good move, protected the cut..
reid: OK, here is a perception issue:  which stones are stonger, the C9 group or the D16 group?  Well, D16 isn't even a group, it's a single stone.  Clearly, black should "play away from strength" and help out his weaker group.  Something like A (B15) starts taking corner territory while attacking white's eye base.  If white B, black blocks with C, white D and black has time to connect the big move at E because white is not alive yet.  In the game, white ended up with about 10 points in this corner,  If black plays A here, he has more than twelve points.  Of course, he loses some on the other side, but only about three or four points.
i was wondering, was this bigger than the move white just played? i think white gained more benefit than I..  reid: No, this is a blunder by white.  Black clearly gets more that white here.  The proverb says "play the urgent move, not the big move".  White C12 is clearly urgent.  Actually, without this blunder, black has pretty much lost the game already (and we're barely 50 moves in).
reid: But what was black thinking here?  was this a 'clicko'?  Of course, black must hane at C17.
reid: Ouch!
reid: This is pretty small compared to the black corner changing into a white corner.
reid: Trading the corner is a huge loss for black.
reid: This move is also huge.
my big territory was reduced so much..  reid: Well, it was never your territory.  This is another perception issue.  As long as white has Q2 undercutting the foundation, black cannot expect much from the bottom side.
decided to get the center from this move
reid: White A looks better.  Simply join up with no complications.  Here is another perception issue.  black should recognize that he is behind in this game.  White has three rather large corners, and black has very little real territory.  Since losing by 50 points is the same as losing by one point, it makes sense to start making things complicated when you're behind.  It's time for black to start gambling.  After white R13, black A could give white some trouble.  White of course plays B, and then the question is if black can live after C.  White may be pretty sure he can kill black, but if there's even a small chance black could cause trouble, white needs to prevent that line.
reid: This way is pretty easy for white.
so far so good..
reid: This is the wrong starting point for white.  White should recognize that the entire area around A is neutralized by white's D17 stone.  So white should not be playing near this neutral area.  Instead, he should see how black responds to the invasion at B.  White has three reasonable continuations from B (C, D, and E or F), so he should have no trouble gaining life.
i think this might be one of my losing moves because i lost the opportunity to gain benefit while attacking white at the same time  reid: I think it's black's only choice.  As I mentioned in the previous move, the area to the left of J16 is small.  Black needs to kill this stone to win.  To kill it, black's formations need to be strong.
reid: I think black needs to try A.  If white P18, black can block at Q18.  A is a "shape" point for white's eyes.
press B to continue
i think that im winning here a bit with my thickness  reid: I don't think so.  White has at least 30 on the right, 15 in the lower left,  8 in the top right and 8 in the upper left.  61 total plus komi.  These are all what white actually has already.  Several of those numbers could be improved fairly significantly.  Black has 14 on the left side and about 12 in the upper right.  Total 26.  That means black needs to get 61+6-26 or 41 points out of the center. And he needs to do that while not letting white get anymore points.  That's not going to be easy.  White has good reducing moves at A, B, and C (but he should play the big double sente at D before C to remove tha aji of black S13).  I have only a few more closing comments which can be found in move 122.
huge..
should of came here first i think
a big piece of territory in the middle, but i feel that the white territory is ebbing away my win, so i must start taking some extra territory right away, i decided to let the left center white piece sit there for a while since the top left white corner isn't 100% alive yet..  reid: I don't understand what white is thinking here.  If he connects with A (or C if he wants to get cute about it), the game is reasonably close on the board and white wins with komi.  But if black cuts off the D6 group with B (after white J6), that's about a 20 point exchange and white loses.  Not a single move between now and move 138 (where white finally plays A) is worth as much as this.  Black *must* play B next, or he has no chance.  The go board is a large and complex space.  It is vital to see through to the true situation that the stones represent.  You duty as a go player is to think clearly and not get distracted by what you would like to see.  The second lessen is don't help your opponent.  That is something we amateurs do all too often.  Keeping sente is important, but even more important is that every move you make must be necessary. Make sure the exchange is better for you than for your opponent..  Never make a move that you don't need to make, just because it's sente.  And don't make endgame moves until you're in the endgame.  Analysis ends here.  Good luck, play strong, reid.
too late... i regret my decision in leaving that group, this was huge..
thus a huge ko starts, if i win, i get to threaten both white groups in the corner and the top. but if white wins, my game is finished
this i decided after was a bad attack point.. regret it very badly, but if white has one eye in the corner and gets to the center before I do, white can live, see variation..
press B for variation
alive..
tried desperately now to reverse my lack of territory, but i saw that it was too late..
press B to continue
i think i lost a bit of points there.. i need to work on my endgame..
no ko threats now can match my 6 stones getting taken, so i connected ...
I lost by about 15 points to white, it was quite shameful. I've been playing for a while now and i really wanted to improve my game, but it seemed that it's harder to climb upwards as one progresses. anyhow, thx for looking at my game!
Rare move.
This is a gready move for B. It would be better for him to expand his moyo at A or B or to attack C14 stone (C)
Good response for W, but look also at some variations at move 11
Good solid move :)
If you want to strengthen your C14 group, it would be better to exchange A for B, but playing this way you erase aji of invading san-san later (see variations).   But even if B plays B16 first, W can live easily playing B9. So you can see, W group is safe now and there is no need to play in the upper-left corner immediately. It would be much better for W to play around K17 (your opponent's good move is your good move too)
This is the bad move for W: it doesn't make territory, it doesn't  protect your weak stones (C14 group isn't a weak one), it doesn't  attack opponents weak stones. This move is gote. This  move gives B a chance to take any "extra" big point on the board "for free". It is like giving your opponent a handicap stone during the game.  Try to avoid such moves in your games and you will become 2 stones stronger ;)  Now B can take any big point on the board (K17 or P10 for example) and fuseki will be favorable for him. W should play A, B or C (see variations at move 23) instead of F14 in this position
Now B is ahead. His territory on the upper side is roughly equal to W bottom and low-right (but keep in mind, that invasion around G3 is still possible), but B has great center moyo (marked with triangles "two-wing" formation) to expand. Now W should launch a very effective atack against B weak groups (marked with squares) to win...
Good but kind passive. Better to put it on the D6 or D7
W can safely play B4 (see var.)
If you want to expand W moyo, it will be better to play K6, but it will be slow (around 8-12 extra points for W). Now it's much more urgent to reduce B potential centre moyo (A or B for W). If B manages to play P10, the game will be very hard for W
Black moves 33-37 are a kind of "thank-you moves" - they give nothing to B, while helping W to build the solid wall.  B left group is safe now, so instead of E5, he must take any big point (A-C)
There is no need to connect two strong alive groups. Instead of E10 W  MUST reduce B moyo now
Now B lower-left group is super overconcentrated and W has the extrasolid wall which will be very useful in reducing B moyo ))) Moves from 33 to 43 were very bad for B. But F11 is slow for W - there is no need to defend this cutting point now (see var.). Now it is the best time to play P15, Q11 or R12 to reduce B moyo!
Good move!
Too slow. Need to be around P14
Now the game is very hard for W.
good move
Solid, but L13 better
Good move for W - one of the biggest points on the board now )
Too slow
W can also tenuki to play B or C
Too slow! K15, H16 or A2 will be much bigger
10 pts mistake. Just tenuki would be better for B.
8 pts mistake for W. Need to be at T8!
good
That is B mistake - he must sacrifice H18 and play F17
Now B need to sacrifice E16 stones
luckiness for W :-))) C17 group is unconditionally dead and B must resign now!
130 - 142 moves are just overplays for W. Try to avoid  playing this way, especially if you are ahead - it's impolite to your opponent and spoils your style!
No need to defend here
This move is useless
No need to "kill" stones that are already dead ;)
B attempts to live are hopeless until W makes some big mistake. You should be very carefull in such situations if you don't want to loose the game you've already won! Here W can safely pass )
No need to defend here - B can't cut 'cause it will be self-atari.
B must play B13 to live!
This mistake gives B the chance (see variations.). W must play B13.
But B looses his chance...
B stones need 2 moves in a row to live - so they are dead.
(1) -> hello!
CD: I guess a thighter pincer would have been better?  RE: I think in this position, a higher pincer would be more appropriate.
RE: This is not a sufficient base. Also, you're forcing black to hurt your corner. Jumping out is better.
CD: Maybe better at d2?  RE: D2 is bad. It allows black E3 later. Actually C2 is bad for black because this allows white to fix the E3 aji.
CD: I feel like the black moyo on the right could solidify quickly, so I need to do something. Would there be better ways?  RE: There are a few options, check variations.
CD: I guess this was bad. Maybe better at O14?
RE: This seems a little loose of an attack. I would prefer A (you remain stronger) or B (you attack the tighter black connection)
RE: The weakness in your attack is revealed here.
RE: This seems a little pointless. Seems aji-keshi to me.
RE: This seems very small compared to moves like P2 or J2
CD: I thought the white group had a problem but Black lets me live easily.
M: I wanted white to invade, if white dared to, and attack the white stones in a way that would help me build influence on the bottom, while waiting for an opportunity to play o16... does this plan seem rational? would a normal move at k4 or k3 been better?  klin: Of course k3 or k4 better.
klin: O3 shoul P2
M: was this too passive and/or overconcentrated? I wanted to keep white from settling...  klin: The shape is bad because of O3.
klin: W R6 a bad move, only helping B.
M: would n8 be better in this case? was o9 too passive? i thought things may get complicated... and i don't really like complication.  klin: Did you say earlier you played L4 because you wanted to attack?  Now you said you don't want the ccomplication?  Of course N8 better.
klin: Now if B S4, W does not have two eyes.
klin: B followed W's move and missed the opportunity.
klin: W J4 too deep. B should kill it.
M: was there a better way to handle the invasion? or was there really no choice?  klin: K3 not good.  Now should N2, then O2.
klin: W R2 should O2 first.  It will be difficult for B to kill if W plays at O2.
klin: This is bad. Should N2. If W M2, B M1 then O2.  In this case, if W cut at O4, B has 2 eyes.
klin: W escaped easily.  My conclusion is: if you cannot attack, don't play moves like L4.
M: was i just lucky, or did white really need to connect??  klin: Not necessary, but it worths a move.
klin: B gets gote here.
M: Here, i thought it would be enough to just let white live, take sente, while looking at the invasion at f17... or was there a way to kill all white in the upper right?  klin: Wrong. Invading at F17 is not a big deal.  Of course it is possible to kill W.  You have so many stone around them.  If the cost is to let M17 escape, the let it be.
M: would blocking/defending at c14 or c13 been a better choice?  klin: Yes. C14, or F12 better. No comment beyond this point.
M: mistake on my part: didn't see the cut... i guess i should've gone at J9 instead of h7??  *end of questions. Thank you... rest is endgame. B +9.5
JUG: A kakari (corner approach) is good, bF3 would be a kakari too, but approaching Ws 3-4 is a bit bigger. bD14 is not the common kakari though. Probably played in fear to get pincered, but 'A' or 'B' are the most common approaches. There's no need for this specialty move, ... and B can still be pincered (at 'C' for example). Don't be afraid of getting pincered.  The basic priorities in the opening you find in the following list compiled from a section of http://senseis.xmp.net/?Shygost :  1. Playing in response to issues (things that are too good to pass up or to let happen, i.e. I have a wall and can use it to attack or extend from, etc). 2. When your 3-3 or 4-4 stone is approached, respond (unless something else is urgent). 3. Playing in empty corners. 4. Playing in unfinished corners (single stones on the 3-4, 3-5 and 5-4 are unfinished corners) 5. Start a joseki in a “2 stone finished (colors are not important)” corner that is to your advantage. 6. Approaching the 3-3 or 4-4 stone. 7. Sides. 8. Center.   This list should be seen as a guideline, which you decide, if to follow or not. Prio 4 gives what to do here and so you did.
Jepper: what are some options for black here?  JUG: your next move at 'A' should be best, 'B' is possible too, but i don't like it very much. It's a good habit after a game of yours to review it yourself. You can look up joseki and see how they go, so you learn more about possible variations with each game.  joseki = known sequence that results in a fair result for both sides.  A good reference is the joseki-dictionary you can freely download from http://waterfire.us/joseki.htm Another (not so complete) reference you can find on http://senseis.xmp.net/?Joseki
JUG: good
JUG: This move is very submissive for W. Joseki for W would be 'A' or 'B' instead (see vars before). B at 'B' next returns to a joseki as if bD15 have been first played as kakari. But B can play another joseki now starting with 'C' (see next var).
JUG: good, now we have the same result as if B would have started with bD15 first as kakari
JUG: W want to avoid a B approach on the left, so W played an extension from the corner.  However, W might play a checking extension at 'A' instead: the "checking" expresses that it is an extension with an "added value". wC8 would not be an extension from the corner alone, but it also prepares for an invasion at 'B' or 'C'. So that's what makes up a multi-purpose move. wC7 alone is only one purpose, a simple defending move.  Despite that "invasion"-threat, B could still play away as the invasion will work, but B is far away from death as he would gain thickness (see vars before).  W didn't played on 'A', so the B left group is less vulnerable to that kind of attack (invasion). Being aware of those kind of weaknesses is a step in the right direction to become stronger. A more active way for W would have been 'A' or 'D' (following the mentioned opening prios).
Jepper: how do you feel about this move?  JUG: Playing on the bottom is a good idea, as it denies W an extension on the interesting side (also W would like to play here). The top is not interesting as W has a low stone (wF17) there. So the bottom and the right are the interesting sides.  However, B has two 4-4 stones, which both have the desire for an influenced base game. So, a move on 'A' or 'B' would have been very good too as that would emphasize the meaning of the other high stones on the board (see var before). That would be more of a moyo-based games. Moyo are built of high-stones. Low-stones are not well suited to help in building a moyo as those can get reduced easily.
Jepper: where should black have played?  JUG: wG3 is just too small (and again no checking extension) AND Ws corner can still be invaded. wR10 would make a better alternative.  Comments on B in next node.
Jepper: i wanted to try something new and i was thinking of building a moyo on the bottom and at the same time peeking into the center. was this move too small?  JUG: bK5 is too early as the right is much too open for invasions.  There's a proverb: "First corner, then side, then center." - According to the opening-list, no corners are left to approach or to close (the 4-4 stone is not meant to make corner-territory as it would need two moves to enclose it). - The sides are still open, so take sides: at 'A' for example (building up a moyo).
JUG: holy, W is sooo defensive (this is too good for B), and beside that, a B invasion at 'A' might still be working (though it gets more difficult). Ws move are very inefficient. W has to prevent B from making a double-wing with bQ10 taking wR10 instead.
JUG: The right is much bigger (bQ10), and this stone does not resonate well with the high 4-4 stone as the corner is still open for invasion. A move on the 3rd line cries for territory, which W can simply taking away with a corner invasion. Let your stones work together (make them efficient). B at 'A' would create a big moyo (framework), which W would need to invade. Even wO17 would be too small after bQ10. See var before.
JUG: that's a checking extension by W (also threatening an invasion), but only making about 6 points, so just too small for W at this stage of the game. The top was stable, so W had to play something on the right (wR10 or wR14 for example, see var before).  W needlessly fears for bH17. This is Ws right to play as W has thickness (a thick group) on the left. bH17 would be gote.
JUG: very good (now imagine bL17 on the 4th-line, that would make a powerful moyo). B has now a good double-wing at the bottom and one at the top (a good structure to aim for in general).
Jepper: i'm never sure what to do in response to this. where should black play?  JUG: About the principle of moyo and invasions: W must invade, a reduction would be not sufficient. Invasions are normal. A moyo (framework) aims at exactly such invasions. Build up a big framework, so that the opponent has to come in (invade) to make it smaller. By attacking the invader, you make pure territory out of your moyo. That's how it works. The "potential" territory in a moyo is shared and you try to get the bigger part of it.  In order to get the most from an invasion, you have to play from the side, where you can you make the most profit. The basic principle after an invasion is: "Attack to make profit!". That means, put pressure on him, make it hard for him to live; but remember it's not about "attack to kill", only to make the most profit out of an attack. When an attack is not sente any more -> tenuki (maybe later you can go on with the attack from another direction).  To properly attack it helps to understand how an invasion is working. An invasion is a two-step-process (here outlined for a W invasion): 1. If there is a move, where W can live or escape easily to some allied stones or groups -> take that move and live or escape easily (whatever is easier). 2. Otherwise, play a forcing move. That helps in bringing more supporting stones in the area of the invasion, it can help to make living shapes, attack your opponent. Then return to step (1).  Now, how to attack a group: In general there are two ways: 1. make it hard for opponent, that group can live (by taking away the base) 2. take away a running direction (enclosing a group can be a valueable goal)  wR10 is a forcing move => B need to take away the base on the more profitable side (which is bigger) -> bR9 (see next var)
Jepper: was the direction of play correct here?  JUG: The other side 'A' has more potential to make bigger profit (see var before), but hard to call this bad. "Direction of play" is about bringing your stones to work together to reach a goal.
JUG: B at 'A' is more solid and has less aji. Later W may have a peep at 'B'.
JUG: too submissive by B, W is not alive yet and can be put under pressure, so better at 'A' or 'B' (see vars before) to take more profit out of the attack.
JUG: W overplays, W wants everything. W should take 'A' instead and live and propably take sente if B takes bR3 (see var before)  If B wants sente, he can play at 'B' (bQ3) to continue building the moyo, though giving up the corner so easily would be a big loss.
Jepper: did black choose the correct direction of play?  JUG: yes, very good (W can have the corner or the outside, but not both, or at least not without a fight) When W gets the corner, B takes the outside. It will not be easy to kill the outside group if B is passive, so Ws plan might work out good.
JUG: this is fine, though bS4 instead can be considered as it threatens both sides: the corner and the right W group (see var before).
JUG: good
Jepper: where should black play?  JUG: W is alive in the corner, now (try to) take the outside: could try 'A' or 'B' (attacking Ws base).  My preference would be 'A' or 'C'. That attacks Ws weak group (after W took the corner) AND it has a positive effect on the top corner. W can't invade any more after bS11 (reasoning included in 'A'-var before).
JUG: bF10 is too far, bE10 makes better shape (and is less vulnerable). But playing the left is not following "direction of play" (in your words). The left group is in no danger. W took the corner, so B has to take the outside now. If B tenuki, W might manage it to bring his right group to live, which would be bad for B as B would have lost the corner AND the right side.  --- There's a simple list of questions referred to as basic three questions from "the LIST" (resembling http://senseis.xmp.net/?Shygost):  1. Am I ok? - Are my groups ok or can they be hassled? 2. Is the opponent ok? - Can groups be "hassled" (put on pressure to live or escape) or chased to get profit? 3. Are there undecided areas? - big areas that not yet became solid points for one of the players  One might say, this is silly, but if you manage to apply this questions for each and everyone of your moves, it has the positive effect, that you don't have weak groups or know where to attack or engage. It will take some time to keep up the discipline to apply it on every move, but it's very helpful when you search for your next move.  The list does not spit out a move, but it answers the question what the next move should accomplish, what it should aim at. Then you search for a move to fulfill that aim.  This list takes the "desire" of the stones into consideration. What do the stones (your army ;) want on the board. That is about efficiency: bringing your stones on the board to work together. Another word for that is "direction of play".  The advantage of this list is, that you can apply it at every time without knowing what previously sequences might have occured.  Question 1 of the LIST, reveals, that Bs groups (bC10, top, bottom) are all ok. Question 2 of the LIST, reveals, that W has a weak group (R9): B is really strong around and W have no eyes yet => so attack that group.  Variations for 'AB' have been showed before. 'C' can be possible too, ending gote, but restricting W more.
JUG: W wants to destroy all of Bs territory (very aggressive), but as outlined, B can't play the double-hane joseki because of Ws 'A'-group, so B missed his chance and W can get an easy invasion with this and may still able to bring 'A' to life.
Jepper: again, did black choose the correct direction of play? i have a feeling F10 had something to do with this, but i'm not sure.  JUG: B missed a chance to attack Ws group on the right and bring W to make a commitment. After Ws invasion wR17, Bs ways are limited (no double-hane), though both directions are playable in my opinion as B have good potential to make big territory in the center.  The 3-3 invasion ends up with a wall for you and the corner for the invader. A wall normally wants a high-extension (on the 4th-line, bK16 for example). bL17 is on 3rd-line and one point shorter than the perfect extension, which makes the resulting wall for bQ17 a bit inefficient (can be reduced easily).  On the other hand, bR16 would be inefficient too in a way (see var before). bQ12 on bQ11 instead would make a better relation to the resulting wall. It's hard to say, which is better. I think, I would have taken the bR16-side (as showed in the variation with an early tenuki from the joseki to attack Ws right group).
JUG: double hane at 'A' does NOT work in this case because W can connect with 'B' (see var before).
JUG: bR18 ends gote, but "sente" is something of value to have. bS11 is still a better move now, as it attacks Ws right group AND prevent a W connection to S14 for sure. The W top corner group is alive, but Ws R9-group is not, so it makes more sense to attack the weak group first.
Jepper: what is the best way to erase white's lower left? could black have played elsewhere?  JUG: Locally bF7 has only a relation to bF10 and doesn't do much. W can ignore it and take sente to 'A' helping his right 'F'-group or if not interest in saving that group, start reducing W with something around 'E'.  Ws lower left is unimportant right now. Attacking W on the right is more promising to help building a great center. But if you are asking locally for an invasion of the bottom left corner: With Ws 'CD'-stones in place it's very difficult. I would not dare to try it. However, i put in a possible B invasion with bC4 and a hard lecture to learn (see var before).  Urgent would be: Ws move wQ9 is a bit slow and heavy and is against a proverb: "Don't push from behind". So simply walking ahead is good for B. It's also a multi-purpose move: - it keeps W weaker and prevents wP10, which would allow W to make good shape and greatly reduce the center (Bs valueable potential for territory) - it helps nicely in building the N14-area - it follows a principle (walking ahead in opposite to "Don't push from behind") - it has a good follow-up if W don't follow (bP9) also making the center bigger - It not only keeps W weaker, it also prevents wP10 (allowing W to make good shape and B heavy),
JUG: locally aim for center-moyo with 'A', take stones on the board better into account aiming for a big center-moyo. W would be glad to be able to make good shape with W at 'A' (later).
JUG: locally good, but still 'A' is better
Jepper: i was thinking of playing at L15 as well. was there a better point to play besides here and L15?  JUG: Still urgent is 'E' (keeping W weaker) and making good shape. B at 'C' would be good (is sente), but too small right now.  Locally standard reductions are at 'A' or 'B' (bJ15 is indeed not so good), but 'E' is bigger (in being an attack AND defense). See vars before for some standard reductions of around your move.
Jepper: i feel the next few moves were disaster for black. was K15 a better point to play than this?  JUG: both bL16 and bK15 is "pushing from behind" (W can walk ahead and dig in deeply into Bs territory/moyo). bJ15 was the mistake in the first place.  Best way to stop someone from coming in like this is get ahead with bigger jumps: bL15 might not work as W can create cutting points, so using knight moves should be the proper way to stop W and keep the damage low (see var before as example).
JUG: now B have to protect two sides (while W only has one group making damager)
JUG: globally W at 'B' is bigger, but locally W can dive in deeper with 'A'
JUG: good
JUG: a bit slow for W, but solid
JUG: very good
JUG: bG16 is unimportant, still Ws right group does not live, so take away a running direction ('A' for example, that also better protects against W peep at wP5, attacks W and helps in building the center) or take away the base (B at one of 'BCD').
Jepper: this move seems to have been played either too early or too late. it doesn't seem to fit with what's going on with the rest of the board. how should have black handled this situation?  JUG: the marked exchange was bad for B without follow-up, so better don't play it at all as long as there are more urgent issues on the board.  bS7 drives W into the potential center (as outline before this is one way; enclosing would be another). The main problem is, if B can make enough center territory to compensate for W having four corners. Killing the right group would be the win for B, however it's often unsure, if that can be accomplished so easily.  B at 'A' makes a better base-attack (it's more solid and avoids more sente moves for W).
JUG: good
JUG: W walks too slowly
Jepper: this stone as well as other connected to it eventually get wasted. where was a better point to play?  JUG: W had built some thickness and there's a proverb "stay away from thickness", so this is too close, where W is strong. So bP7 is an overplay by B.  Better keep a bit more distance with single stones (take 'A' for example, or bP5 removing aji by preventing a W peep with such a move would be ok too).  Instead of this move, B at 'B' (walking ahead) is also not bad.
JUG: W uses his strength
JUG: bS7 is connected to S5, so better walk ahead at 'A' drawing the stones out)
JUG: destroying eyes first with 'A' could be thought of. The need to attend to a weak string of the three B stones leaves a sour taste (as B was the strong one in the first place).
JUG: very good by W (drawing W out having more running directions, walking ahead of B AND attacking Bs 'A'-stones). Having played bP7 in the first place allowed W to get out easily.
JUG: in principle good, but 'A' is in trouble (think of wN6, B may not be able to escape as W also has the sente wP5).
JUG: this is justified to prevent the connection with the corner. This shows, why bS6 instead of bS7 is better: it automatically prevents the possibility for W to connect with the corner.
JUG: some notes about Ws top right group: bS19 is a strong sente, threatening Ws life (see var before for some more notes on that).
JUG: not good by W (the corner was not the weak group that needs protection), the outer group is.
JUG: after this now, B at 'A' can take away Ws base if needed again
Jepper: where should black play next?  JUG: There's a principle "when touched, touch back", which would be at 'C' (bL11). But there's also another proverb about proverbs and principles: "Don't follow proverbs blindly." Always give it a thought, if the principle applies or if not something more urgent is on the table.  But applying the LIST would reveal, that the 'D'-stones are in a bit of trouble (and also not small), so saving those are more urgent than answering to wM10. However, this is still a difficult fight for B, because W is not weak around 'D'. Worth trying can be B at 'A' or 'B', but making the exchange bQ8 for wR8 first, because that destroys a possible W eye (see var before).  W should take 'B' to live and capture the 'D'-stones instead.
JUG: in principle good, but missing the urgent points of having to deal with weak groups 'AB' (own and opponents). This B move is helping a strong group with a single purpose (it says: the 'A'-area is mine).
Jepper: maybe black should have cut at L10 next? what do you think?  JUG: A fight should have a goal (could be various). In this case, it would be to separate a strong 'B' from a weaker side 'C'. But fighting is only possible, if your groups and stones (or walls) around can support such a fight. B's 'A'-group is still very weak, so starting a fight doesn't help in reaching the goal for the fight.
JUG: good, wL11 was sente
JUG: this does not protect the 'A'-cut. W should take 'B' (connecting all stones together with one move)
JUG: The ladder works for B (W probably misread in the first place), but cutting is not working here as it helps the weak group 'A'.  A cut normally is good, if it keeps groups weak (by separating them).
JUG: this does not only has effect on 'A', but on 'B' as well.
JUG: pushing from behind is bad as this is driving W towards Bs weakness at 'C'. Better to take one of 'AB'.
JUG: good for W now (threatening bottom group and A)
JUG: locally 'A' instead looks better, but the issue at hand is the 'B' group and the bottom now.
JUG: now W even has sente (with a bit reading ahead 1-3 moves before bJ11 should have revealed that W response).
JUG: this is an empty triangle, better shape with B at 'A' (like this W have more sente moves, because B has one liberty less because of the marked empty triangle spot).
JUG: no choice now in not responding
JUG: W captures some stones, but B is still ahead by ca. 15-20p
JUG: bH2 is making points, but no life ! W can still dive in exploiting the 'A'-weakness.  From here on (after wN6), there's very bad aji at 'A', so simply removing that aji is the most urgent move now: live with one move, completly removing that aji (potential complications) with B at 'A' (in this case). B at 'A' is preferred because it makes B unconditionally alive (one eye at O3 and another at the bottom).  Killing the 'B'-stones is about 25 points. Besides of loosing the 'B'-stones could also mean, that the 'C'-stone can't survive, which would be another 20-30 points. There's not one move on the board that big (except some few exceptions, that W would answer, but still leaving the weakness open till B takes gote to fix it).  Removing the aji of 'A' is the only move now, but is not mentioned too often from here any further as it distracts too much from other matters.  --- Sharpening your awareness of own weaknesses and that of your opponent can improve your go significantly. This "need" will be accompany you up to dan-level. Take it at your own pace, increasing your knowledge step by step.
JUG: This move is really big, even if ending gote.  BTW, the marked B exchange (bH2 for wG2) is not good when left alone: W has wJ2 to take it away (see next var). The normal follow-up is to draw back at bJ2 (ending in gote).
JUG: or at 'A'
JUG: B here is "the blind man walking" (at the hand of W). For every move evaluate, if there is not a bigger one or stronger sente move.  Ask yourself, is wG7 really sente ? - Would W ignore B at one of 'AEC' ?  Besides, did i mention, that 'D' is still bigger ?  ;-)
Jepper: the next several moves are another blunder by black. what was the best response for black here?  JUG: 'E' of course, but locally 'D' looks ok.  Also W has some bad aji at 'AB', but not as bad as 'E'. But those can serve as pool for good ko-threats (there might be a ko with Ws 'C'-group).
JUG: A instead might work out better
JUG: an empty triangle (normally bad shape, but not always). 'A' instead could be an alternative (see var before).  Taking "sente" is an important issue during a game. Often players are willingly throwing away up to 8 stones (sacrificing them representing about 16 points) in order to get somewhere else a compensation for the loss. If you can gain somewhere else enough points, then sacrificing a few stones can be worth the price.
JUG: The two marked stones are not significant, better give them up (see vars before).
JUG: painful for B
JUG: very good to take back sente increasing the liberties of Bs group
JUG: better at 'A', otherwise W can make more damage with W at 'B': W just need to have more libs than B (see vars before to check, that B at 'A' works, requires reading of course).
JUG: good
Jepper: black falls apart from here on.  JUG: B must take at least 'B' or else Ws 'A'-group can walk in. bL13 only threatens 5p in gote(!) with a snapback.  'C' still urgent. Then go for big yose 'DE' + attack the W top right group.
JUG: "the blind man walking" again ...  B at 'B' is bigger.
JUG: very big for W, because wS11 now connects with good territory at the right. But still a close game.
JUG: Locally 'B' is bigger than bJ16 (see var before)
Jepper: the rest of the game is just black putting down stones on the board for white to take. where should black play?  JUG: It's too late now. B can resign now. The remaining comments therefore concentrate on local issues. B may be able to connect the group, but in points W is too far ahead by ca. 20-25p after that (see possible var before).
JUG: there are no eyes in the corner, and the corner has more libs than Bs string of stones (=semeai, that B can't win), so get out with 'A' (see var before).
JUG: 'A' is better for W (making W stronger and take away a lib from B; see var before), B is dead now.
JUG: W instead at 'A' should work better for W, bM7 was an overplay (see var before)
JUG: doesn't increase libs
JUG: W is trying to avoid a ko
JUG: no eyes and nothing to connect to having eyes
JUG: W at 'A' is much bigger, capturing more B stones (see var before)
JUG: not needed by W, wS9 would work the same: wT8 is making less points)
JUG: B could make a seki, but only if the 'A'-group is alive (otherwise W can capture the outside). Globally take 'C' instead is the biggest move on the board after taking 'B'.
JUG: this is not needed by W, so it is -1p.
JUG: good, W missed 'A'
JUG: if ahead by many points, this can be played. This is not needed, a B invasion would fail (W is much too strong around). So another -1p. In close games such move can loose a game.
JUG: summary:  W was very defensive and slow in the opening allowing B to build a large moyo (upto move #19). B had the lead very long. The non-urgent moves have been #37 (bF10), #49 (bF7), #65 (bG16), #87 (bH12) and #91 (bL10). Those were to gentle on W playing away from important issues. Move #55 (bJ15) was making it difficult to hold the center big by letting W in too easily. Move #71 (bP7) was creating a weak group (near another not fully healthy group, the bottom).  Both players didn't see the enourmous bad aji of N3 around move #107. Beside of that essential move, endgame started at move #108. B blindly followed W without looking for stronger sente. But also W played unimportant moves going after the "smaller" chunks. At the end, this game was decided in the endgame (and in particular by overlooking the danger at N3). Up to then, the game was in favour for B. Well done. Also it was important to keep sente, which B lost sometimes needlessly. One more weakness showed up in reading mistakes, especially in the bottom right quadrant.  In particular you asked for comments about Bs opening, direction of play and keshi. As far as I can tell, B played a good opening with a glitch here and there and some misunderstanding of how to use walls and high-stones (for influence). In my opinion, there was no need for keshi on Bs side, but on W side ;-) ... Bs moyo was extremly big and would have needed a big reduction, mostly caused by Ws slow moves in early fuseki. Some common sequences have been added in the review.  It is also very important to keep sente, which B lost sometimes needlessly. Sacrificing-techniques can be useful for that. You have to work on longer keeping sente. When taking sente playing away, weaknesses are left behind. When you do, take a quick reading, what weaknesses you leave behind when you choose to tenuki. Apply the same, when your opponent tenuki. That's sharpening your awareness of weaknesses.  The LIST was identified and presented as a great help of finding what to look out for in your next move. Always thrive on looking out for multi-purpose moves: if attacking, also look out for moves, that make territory or help in defending your own stones. When defending, look out for moves, that also bring your stones together and may prepare for an attack in the future.   Advice: - Try applying the question-LIST at least at some of the moves in your games. Best if you apply it on each and every move (you then never have weak groups and don't overlook, when the opponent will get too big areas). It's hard at the beginning but with time you do it automatically. To decide what's an undecided area or not, comes with experience: play 100-200 games concentrating on invasions, then you get a feeling what works and what does not, getting to know what is an undecided area and what isn't.  - Good reading skills are important, not only to kill groups or make them alive, but also to check if oneself is alive or other can be cut successfully or if you or the other have any weaknesses, which you should be aware of and attack on or defend when neccessary. Try to develop an awareness of your and the others weaknesses ready to explore it. As long as a stone is on the board it might has some surprising effect.  - Focus on not-loosing sente, read ahead a few moves, if a move ends in sente or gote. Carefully check, if a move really must be answered or if you have a stronger sente-move, that your opponent must answer himself or if going out to inflict mutual damage would be acceptable.  - As a general advice i recommend that you review all of your games (at least those that you lost): try to find better moves, where you messed up, alternatives play (also looking out for the best answers of your opponent). Look up other joseki or joseki where you screwed up in some joseki dictionary.  If you see that a move does not work, it makes you a better player not even to try it and hoping for an opponents mistake. And if you don't understand what was going on in one of your games, get some help from stronger players (get us GTL-reviewers something to do ;-)  Hope that review was of some help.  Have fun with this wonderful game!  Cheers, /JUG
This is ok.  I think the attachment is probably slightly superior and this move is more used to avoid complications -  like when you're playing handicap as black and are afraid of white's fighting ability.
This white move seems funny.  I think it belongs at A.
This is bad shape.  I agree with your comment that S16 looks better.
Notice how white took both of the points where black could make the "tiger's mouth" shape?  This is why this is bad shape for black.
I don't like this move at all.  White has two weakish groups on the top right and you could profit by harassing them.
This move is very strange.  If the marked stone were black, you could try it as a cosmic style huge moyo play.  But on this board there is no moyo possibilty there, and you should use the normal priorities of corner first, then side, then center.  Any of these moves seem normal and good.
good.  Splits white.
From here onward, I had no idea what to do with these stones.    Yes, they are awkward, but still valuable since they are separating two unsettled white groups.
J: Expecting white to take either A or B, planning on playing a ladder breaker at X.    Interesting move!  Feels like it leaves aji, but it also accomplishes putting real pressure on white.
this is a bad move.  It does nothing for white at all, and fixes black's cutting point.
My first reaction is that this is overplay for white.  White is not strong enough to cut and fight.
Guo Juan, 5 dan professional, calls this move a "coffee break."  Right in the middle of a fight, you play somewhere else on the board (taking a coffee break).  This move ignores the urgent fight (yes, I know it's a ladder breaker)  Black plays a center move when there are no moyos.  The lower left corner won't die if white ignores this move.  This move isn't really sente, so white should just ignore it and win the fight in the top right.
J: There must be a better move.  Maybe A or B.  Yes, this is close to a pass move.  White should capture at C.  All of black's center oriented stones lose all their meaning instantly.
White should not have allowed this.
suddenly blacks stones are really working together powerfully.
You can't let white drive a spike between your stones this way.  You MUST block.  Letting your opponent "spike" your stones like this is almost ALWAYS bad.
Very good move for white.
Good.  Huge.
A and B are HUGE moves now.
bad move.  helping white, doing nothing for black.
Good.  This is correct.
No, this is where white crashes.  See variation.  White should have been fine here, but this move makes all the problems.
poor white...
J: Trying to close white in, strengthening both black groups and building outside influence  Good thinking.  The black group on top could come under attack without makeing a move around here.    The value of the influence is diminished because of A, but it's still valuable.  Letting white drive through at A was very bad.  Moves B and C are still HUGE.  See the variation here to see how a white move at B destroys all of black's influence and also makes black's 4th line profit dissapear into a tiny group.
Good move.  Very big.
Good move.
Very big move.
I think this move is fine.
Seems wrong.  Leaves too many cuts.
See variation.  This just makes a heavy dumpling shape.  White should just make shape and life quickly here.
Good.
dumpling.
No, make life.
Good
This is wrong.  Just like it was bad to let white drive a spike between your stones in the upper left, here you MUST drive a spike between white's stones.
Good move.
wrong atari.
White resigns. Thanks for the review.  We really appreciate it!
There is still a ko fight this way.
How is this opening up to 5?  Not sure about it, I just got tired of playing the same star point opening  MM: I'm not great at fuseki.  Orthodox advice would be to make a corner enclosure with R5 or another nearby point (triangles).  The Chinese Fuseki patterns are also available at Q9 or R9 (squares).  This particular move, K3, seems unusual and maybe not good.  It's not sente, and it may be cut off from the Q3 corner.  If you're willing to accept those drawbacks in exchange for some other goal, then maybe it is not bad.
How is black 7?  I thought of going one closer at A but figured that it was too far away from the marked stone in the corner, I was hoping that white would play at B and I would get sente to play elsewhere  MM: I like the game Black 7 at R6.  With the Q3 and K3 stones, it makes a nice corner framework.  Good move.
So I expected white 8 at some point but not this early this doesn't seem to be the right play by white with the pushing sequence that follows I think black gains  MM: I agree, White 8 at R4 is unnecessarily aggressive and poorly timed.
I didn't think this through all the way but I figured that I could double hane
I like the gain I have here, but I hate losing sente, but I expect that I have a very big head start right now  MM:  All in all, I think Black is doing better so far.  The Q3-Q6 wall is very nice.  You could consider keeping sente and letting White capture the S5 stone.  At this stage, it's only worth a few points anyway.
This seems not to be the right spot for white I would have expected either a or b  MM: Keeping in mind that I'm poor at fuseki...  White's 20 at R13 seems to be the right distance from the R9 formation.  I think the proposed 'b' at R12 would be a little too close for good efficiency.  The suggested 'a' at R14 looks playable, and might be better than the actual move since it puts more pressure on the corner.
I was not sure what to do here but black 21 didn't seem bad... I don't think its optimal but I just couldn't seem to find a better spot.  White still has a weakness at a that I can attack later and 21 seemed to protect the corner.  I considered b and c but they seemed too slow and left the corner open to a 3-3 invasion.  I was expecting white to extend to d and then I could extend to c  MM: 21 at R15 seems ok.  N17 (triangle) is the usual joseki response to R13; however, in this case it is complicated by the Whites around R9.  It may be best to attack at R11 ('a') right away.
Okay now I don't really like 21 as much as I did before but white seems to be playing overly aggressive so I think I should be able to capitalize on that somehow so I plan on attacking the marked stone by pushing on white 22  MM: I agree, White is playing a little too aggressively, and Black should be able to reap the benefits.  The 21 move at R15 still seems ok to me.
MM:  This does not feel like the best option.  One common joseki sequence -- White N16, Black O15, etc. -- is wrong, since White is alive around R11.  Also White can still go into the corner.  If White just plays the natural move at N16, the stones make a nice long extension from the top left corner.  All in all, I think P17 defending the corner, then taking sente, would be better.
Now after this attack I am not really pleased the marked stone might still escape and I don't think there is much to gain here  MM:  If I understand correctly, you think the R13 stone can escape and this R11 invasion will not help you much.  I agree, the R13 stone can escape, but this invasion is sente, and should at least bring a nice reduction.  I criticise the timing though, when there are so many large areas of the board that are still empty.
MM: Looks good so far.
I don't think I need to respond to white 30 so I decide to connect from underneath
MM: Nice.
Not sure if I needed black 39 it was just looking a little scary in that corner and I thought that with my existing lead I could probably take the corner points and be happy  MM: I don't think this Black 39 at P18 is necessary.  I do understand you want to keep the 12 - 15 points in the corner.  But this is gote, and there are places on the board where you can get this much in sente.  Then come back later and defend.
I don't think 40 was a good move for white too small  MM:  I agree.
MM: This also seems too small, when moves near F4 and F17 are available.
MM:  This cut shows good fighting spirit.  However, White will become strong all across the upper side, so maybe it is not the best move.
MM: Oh!  White misses the chance to sacrifice two stones for overwhelming thickness and huge territory.  White mistake.
So now we have something to attack in the white stones, not sure how this will come out but I figure I must be able to get some profit here.
MM: Good.
I thought for a long time here and considered some other moves to try to cut the white stones or keep more pressure on them but didn't see anything definative so I went with black 51, hoping white runs to the left allowing me to attack along the way and build a large moyo along the bottom right  MM: Good thinking.  Just make sure the three cutting stones do not die!  Also, expect the White group to eventually get away.  My own approach would be less direct -- perhaps K5 or F4.
MM:  Mistake.  White *wants* to connect, and Black gains little here.  Why force the opponent to do what he wants to do anyway?
was 57 to far away?  MM:  As a rule of thumb, in the center of the board, you can jump one space from one stone.  From a two-stone wall, you can jump two spaces.  From a three-stone wall, you can jump three spaces.  So, you probably could go as far as H13 or H14 (triangles) and maintain the connection.  It is confusing though because of the M11 and N15 groups (squares).  Here, I think it might be better to first go toward the edge of the board, with L16 (cross), then come back and make shape in the center of the board.
I liked white 58, thought it was a strong move... still think black is ahead but at this point I was a little at a loss of where to play so...  MM:  I agree, White K16 is nice.  I'm not sure Black is ahead though -- a lot of the board is still empty.  Black has a large corner and much of the lower side, plus the upper right corner which White can reduce.  White has a medium-small side group, and a territory on the upper side that is suddenly very large, plus two uncontested hoshi in the corners.  Both players have one weak group in the center of the board.  To me, it looks roughly even, maybe with more possibilites for White.  Where next?  Can there be any doubt?  Use Black's weak group to chase the White weak group.
I tried 59 to see if I could catch the marked stones, plus I figured it was good positioning for attacking either of the two white corners in the future.  MM: Right region of the board, but I would rather see better shape -- K10 would be my choice.  Still, this is a good move!  Don't expect to catch the stones, just be happy with profit in sente.  Of course, if you do get the chance to capture them, don't hesitate!  But first make sure it's not a trap.
MM:  Hmm, considering that you would like to connect the two right corners, I think it's better to play O7 and not leave a cutting point.
MM:  Seems too solid.  Better to make a diagonal jump like L6.  There is a proverb -- "chase with the keima, run away with the hane."
MM:  The O7 cutting point is now inconvenient for Black.
MM:  White mistake -- better to play P9 or P8, and stay connected to the right side group.
MM: Nice!
Left an opening in my moyo wall but I figured it was worth it since the stones in the center look dead.  I expect black is ahead by 20+ points  MM:  Counting, I see roughly 60 firm points for Black (assuming White gets to reduce the upper right corner), and about 40 for White.  So the B+20 estimate is reasonable.  However, given how much potential White has, I would rather have White's position.
MM:  Bad move.  White should give up this group, and maybe have it as a ko threat later, or threaten to rescue it from the outside to reduce Black in sente.
MM:  Nice!
MM:  You killed White's center group, and in trying to save it White forced you to strengthen the corner, so White gave up the corner reduction.  Very nice for Black!
Hmmm now where to attack
MM:  Not a bad place.  I like F4 better.  Also, it may be worth gote to plug the hole at O5 -- that is worth about 15 points, I think.
I don't think I played this very good, sort of thought I was pretty far ahead so I probably played too loose but white 02 doesn't seem like a good move  MM:  I think White 102 would be more secure at O5.  But, what is White doing with the D4-G3 stones?  They are not alive yet!
MM:  Maybe this is better at J4, J3, or L3.  But the actual move at L4 would be my first instinct.  I guess White will be able to live now.  White showed good technique, touching a strong stone, since both players usually become stronger in the local area (which is effectly a gain for the player who was weaker in the local area, and causes overconcentration for the locally stronger player).
MM: I'm not sure about this move.  The M4 cutting point will cause trouble.
Again don't like how I played that at all sort of played too defensively.. but I think black is still 20+ points up  MM:  I disagree with your score estimate.  Including prisoners and komi, Black seems to be about 5 points up, not 20 -- and that's assuming that Black gets to play next in the top left corner.  If White is able to keep that corner, then it looks like White is ahead by 5 to 10. B 85
MM:  It is nice to get the corner!
MM:  Now White rescued some stones, I think White is ahead slightly.
oops didn't see that  at the time I did not realize how big that was in points I played the rest of the game as if I was way ahead but actually I think that made the game pretty close. I am probably only up by 10 points or so... had I realilzed this I probably would not have played at the 3-3 point and instead would have played at a  MM:  Yes, White is happy Black didn't see the atari and cut.  KGS Score Estimator has White ahead by 28 points.  I think White actually is ahead by about 20.
MM:  Good!
So I guess now white still has a chance to take the game  MM:  I estimate Black 76, White 66.5 with komi and captures.  Black gained from the corner invasion and is now about 10 points ahead.  The score *is* close enough for White to come from behind and win merely by keeping sente through the endgame.
I don't think I like 39 now at all...where would have been better.... had a tough time here figuring out where to play and what was the most important?  MM:  This aims to reduce the White territory in sente, but it seems too deep and likely to be cut off.  Just a little closer to the main group should be fine.  Also, expanding the moyo in in the lower left center, or connecting the corner to the moyo in sente (by threatening to cut off the D4 (square) stone), should be very good.  I like the points marked by triangles (G14 or G13 to hurt White's moyo, E5 or F5 to connect Black's moyo and corner, or E10 for overall center connection).
MM:  Black is trying too hard.  The natural moves at F14 or F13 would be fine.
MM:  Well, that worked out ok for Black.
I kind of like how this worked out but I think I was lucky that white made it easy for me  MM:  I agree.
That seems like a bad play by white  MM:  This late in the game, White doesn't have much else.  Still, maybe something like F13 or G13 would be better for White.
Followed by a bad play by black  MM:  Yes, a wasted move.
70 was pretty big huh  MM:  Yes, stopping the monkey jump is worth 10 points or so -- pretty big for this stage of the game.  Black still has moves like E2 and P2 though.
I don't think I needed 71 at all but again at this point I did not realize how close the game was i thought I was ahead by 20+ points so I just wanted to finish it nice and quickly
MM:  Nice!
MM:  Was this a misclick?  Obviously, White will cut it off.
White is making it easy for me to win
I realize some of the last plays were not good end game... I just wanted to finish up the game since I figured I already won  MM: Either you counted wrong, or you didn't count.  Which I guess is also a way of counting wrong.
P: I would not say this is a bad move at your level, but the marked ones are more usual, I think that better, and almost all, will avoid problems.  Bear in mind that with E6 you dont buil a base for your stones an in the future they can be attacked.  E16 is OK too. I personally prefer to settle D4 stone an then attack.  See variations  P: Pay attention to variations. Sometimes I will not tell where is one.
P: This is a typical move at your level, and is bad. People at your level use to answer every move the opponent do. You have to get used to look at the whole boardand see if there are bigger moves.   D4 group is not in danger,so c2 is not really necesary. You are not really attacking because c6 group will not die.So C2 dont have really a purpose.Is not doing anything. Take a look at the marked stones. E16 is the best I think.
P: C3 group is strong. You should necerplay near strong groups. Is better to drive your opponent against thickness. See variation
P: Bad.You dont really attack and dont make territory.See variation
P: Not necesary because your group is difficult to kill, and the territory you are making is little.
Oripy : I put that stone on the side of my wall, is it a good way to do it ? Maybe the stone at Q16 is weak and I should have played at Q11 ?  P:Your stone at q16 is not still weak. But normally is better to driveyour opponent toward your thickness, with r12 for example.  q11 is too close to r10, and will lead to a fight in wich he will live or scape stealing territory. It is also too high the fourth line. The third line of r12 makes you assure territory and attack at the same time. Always look for movements with more than one purpose.
P: Again you are lettinghim get into the corner. r15 is better
P: You see. And you dont have territory.
P: Your typical mistake: too high and wrong direction
Oripy : I think this isn't the best move... what can I do better ? K14 to prevent escape to the center ? M16 ?
P: This move is with what purpose?
P:And this? You should be able to always answer to that question with:  a) im making territory b) In attacking and hope I will kill, or make myself stronger, or make him weak c) Im invading  See variation
P: He has made a lot of territory and you nothing
P: I think he´s winning this game because I dont think you'll be able to ensure territory in the low center. He will surely invade. So if you dont do anything, you will loose. It makes no sense to play pasive and let things go. You have to do anything. If it doesnt work, you will loose, but at least you will have a chance. But if you dont do anything at all, you will have no chance.
Oripy : I think that this move was a mistake, maybe M3 is better ?
Oripy : What about P3 or Q3 instead ?
Oripy : Is there a way to cut the White stone at H2 here ? J2 is hopeless I think
Oripy : This move is bad I think, maybe M10 or M9 is better ?
How can I fight against such shapes ? White I so strong with his group...
P: From now on you make some tactical mistakes that I prefer not comment because you will improve just playing and paying more attention
Oripy : played that stone too fast...
Oripy : again, played it too fast...  P:Typical of almost all players, me  included
Oripy : I think this move was unnecessary ?  P: It is worst at least one point.
Oripy : Unnecessary, the group was alive... P: Yes
Shedal: later on, A will be a big point for both sides.
Looking back on this move, I'm wondering if it was a mistake.  This lets him build up a lot of thickness.   Shedal: It is perhaps just a matter of style. With this move, you obtain a big corner, while your opponent gets a nice thickness. Quite reasonable exchange, provided that you will have sente and already have a moyo on the left.  Of course, there are another possibilities like A, B or C. I would probably choose A (see var.)
Shedal: this is not joseki. See variations.
I think R2 undoubtedly must be better.  Shedal: you are right. Maybe Q2 would be even better.
I don't know why I'm inviting for my group to get killed.  S8 looks better.  Shedal: right.
Now... Why I don't just play S4 to let my group live is beyond me.  I think at the time, I wanted to experiment with sacrificing it to see how many tenukis I could get... but had to be better to just save it.  Shedal: A is the move here
Shedal: white can kill cleanly with T3 (see var)
Ko for life now.
Well.. things aren't too bad.  I got a couple of moves top to secure territory, as well as the bottom left.  Also H15 splits white in two, and some fighting here will benefit me I think.  Only problem is the huge white thickness in bottom right... dominates the whole board.   Shedal: due to white's mistake of T2, you've got an extra move, the game is favorable for black.
Shedal: wrong side. See var.
Looking back, this move looks bad.  M16 looks better.   Shedal: this move cannot be bad as it is the vital point for white to escape. This way you are likely to build a huge moyo, and even kill the white group in the process.
I do this to remove white's base here so I can attack him some more.   Shedal: white does not have a base, because you can slide under from both sides. You should blockade white with A.
Trying to play on a large scale.  I wanted to use this move to both attack white and as an anchor to reduce the white bottom. Also, this move works well with the left side too.  I think this is a good move.   Shedal: I can't say if this move good or bad... but at least, your thinking has wrong priorities. First of all, you should attack white, and secondly, you must build your own moyo on the left in the process. And only last thing to do may be reducing white's bottom. Actually, white needs another 2 moves to make solid territory from his moyo.  So, even if you needed to build a moyo and reduce right now, you could A, B or C. But to attack white, D is a must.
Shedal: good move from W, securing some territory and reducing your moyo. But first of all, W should safe his stones on the top with A. To die peacefully for him is out of the question.
F7 looks much better.  I don't know why I decided to invade here.  Perhaps I was panicing about the large white bottom.  Shedal: F7 is better to enclose your moyo. But A is much better as it revives your attack on the marked W group.
Shedal: ok, now your marked stone is useless for your moyo. Still, you have a chance to use it to kill W's upper group.
I didn't notice he could cut here.  L10 is an alternative I found, but looks slow.  H13 looks good too.   Shedal: Still, A is the move that would attack white and help reducing white's bottom.
Shedal: see var.
Shedal: see var.
Here, it didn't look to me like I could live... but I played on anyways.   Shedal: you're being killed, it's because you didn't kill W by yourself when you had an opportunity.
Shedal: passive. You could A.
Shedal: mistake
Shedal: W's mistake. He could just play A.
Shedal: W doesn't need to answer this.
Shedal: see var.
Shedal: A gets more points. Probably, enough to win the game.
Shedal: this gives away a point. It's not a ko threat.
BB: You guys are pretty boring :)
I'm never sure if a double 3-3 is better against a sanrensai (assuming a double low 1 space pincer)?  BB: You're right to treat o3 lightly. O3 was a good move, because if Black defended the right side, with R6 say, he'd be overconcentrated and you could move to say K4 and have an efficient framework on the lower side. Black played m3 hoping you would play r3 like in the top right, because then he would have, not just a moyo, but real territory, and not overly concentrated.  This move stops that.
BB: Why? This is the kind of move I'd like a comment about.
I don't know if this is a good result - it's weakened the moyo on the right, but its very nice shape for black on the bottom, and with sente  BB: From n4, Black played the obvious move at every point. And this is really bad for you. In sente, maybe it would be okay. No, still not, because Black's sente endgame play at q2 is huge, and that's only if he doesn't find a better way to capitalise on the cutting aji at r4. In fact it's so bad, I think you'd have been better off playing r3 here.
BB: Actually, Black is too strong for this area to be interesting. Black should play on the other side, around C6. Then D4 would be under pressure. This way, life for White is easy and Black is overconcentrated at the bottom. This goes against the principle of "play away from thickness."
an overplay?  BB: Definitely not, because you have no weak groups. Like I said, Black's play made life easy for your lower left group.  However, this might not be the right point. When playing inside your opponent's territory, you need to either be able to escape easily, or to "aim at specific weakness". Here, Black k7 would make your escape uncomfortable, to say the least (I haven't looked but I hope that's where he plays). But nor are you aiming specificly at the only weakness - Black's semi-isolated stones on the left and the potential cutting point between them.
BB: Okay, you won this exchange. This is a horribly passive move by Black. As long as you can get responses like j3 from your opponents, keep playing moves like K5.
I'm happy that black has answered K5 so passively so I'll treat K5 as a forcing move.  BB: Damn right :) This is a nice move, too. I like it. d2 is also big, but possibly a little too endgame (in that it's not strategic).
BB: Seems too close, but perhaps it's not, and it's just a good move. Still, o18 is threatening the territory at the top - I don't think you have to pincer this.
BB: I think this is okay. You'll have enough opportunities to get into the top area.
BB: I'll go back a move and see if you'd played here...
BB: I'd prefer taking territory with f17. That way, you get territory while messing up Black. This way, you get less territory, you mess up Black's but his was going to be messed up anyway.
BB: Urkh! You get minor territory and Black gets a weak stone to attack.
BB: Weak stone becomes weak group.
Very risky I know. Staking my game on being able to get some of my central stones to live. Is there an alternative strategy I could have followed?  BB: Yes! Make a living group in the centre! You're strong in the top left and the bottom left - Black d12 would just take a little territory, and you'd still have a weak point to attack at e13.
BB: This is great for Black. A move like f9 for Black would now make a great moyo. But nor can you afford to play there yet.
BB: The proverb says "cut at the waist of the knights move". That would be m16 here (see var.)
This was a poor exchange  BB: This was okay, but m16 would have been better, because it would create a cutting point.
BB: Your sabaki is not too bad, I think.
BB: Actually I think you should let Black cut. See var.  Yeah, having added the variation, I like that much more.
BB: You've got to feel really bad about this. j12 is worse than useless now.
BB: This one workse well. It's nice shape. Now I hope you can feel the value of m15.
BB: I think I'd have played k15.
BB: Also good.
BB: Obviously this is what you wanted.
BB: Yes, you're nicely connected now.
BB: What? Why?
BB: Why? Do you think you have territory here? Or even eyes? Why not try l17 instead.
BB: Exactly! What did you expect? Rather than exchange h17 for k17, you may as well have played l9 or so.
BB: This is good. because you got no shape at the top, you still need these kinds of moves, though I expect Black will get something at the right from this.
BB: What if Black plays m12?
BB: Oh this is so timid. Black must really think he's winning. He should at least play p12! (But I still prefer m12)
BB: And why not. You can't expect to have both sides.
very solid play from black  BB: Unnecessarily so. See var.
BB: This is a wasted move. You may as well pass. How about s10 or d2. If you really think you're weak, play l8, which strengthens you and is probably sente.
BB: Right idea, but should probably be r12 (imagine White q11 now). Actually, why not play q11 now?
I didn't realize that R8 was threatening to cut me off
BB: Evidently. This commits you to saving k5.
BB: You should probably run away first and cut only if Black doesn't take gote to connect.
BB: Should be at f6.
I don't believe I can play K14  BB: Nor do I, so this is a good move, but I guess k15 wasn't.
BB: The White stones cut off are big, but it cost Black two moves - gote twice.
BB: I'd have this at d2, though this could work if you can use it to attack.
nice tesuji from black  BB: Yes.
black is now comfortably ahead
game losing blunder from black
I was surprised about this. If black had answered at S15 I would have played S17, allowing black to win the ko, and then tried to win in the endgame (although it would have been hard). I know I still had a ko threat at E15, but black had many more threats than me, so I had no chance to win the ko fight.
Game over, black plays on for a while but eventually resigns.
BB: K3 is bigger
BB: Should be m10, though it's a small deal.
BB: You should have had this one.
BB: I think s11 is bigger. Then again, this is sente. At l19/m19 is big.
A is not normal.  There are many josekis here, I showed a couple examples.    With B black typically ends up taking the corner.  With C black aims to counter attack white H16.
Not normal.
Black should drawback to the marked point instead.
Adding another move here is painful.
And now this move shows why going to C17 in the first place is bad.  The marked White stone is perfectly placed to prevent black forming a good base here.
See variation also.
A patient move, but I would prefer to put more direct pressure on the white stone.
I think B is better than A.  Both moves help Q16, and both put pressure on a white group.  But B feels faster, covering more ground.
Now for black to defend the corner a second time, he gets a very cramped result.
Overall on the board white has more weak groups than black.  So I think locally black would rather invade 3-3 here.  However I would wait longer to see what happens, instead the right side seems urgent.
Ok now black plays on the right, however this is the wrong direction.  White has two weak groups, A and B, so black should be looking to split them.  That's why Q13 is coming from the wrong side.  See variations for a couple ideas.  It's difficult and I don't know which is best.
Since white answered your forcing move slow/solid, it's not important to save.
Black steals white's eyes, but it's gote.  Then white gets to move on the outside first.  I would move on the outside first.
Now it's white's turn to take the eyes in gote.  In this case it's worse because black can't even make 2 eyes locally.
I don't see why black makes this trade.  Seems bad.
Now G14 and G17 can be cut much easier.
Not important enough.  Defend bottom.
White should probably lean more directly on the group below.
?
Alcibaides [25k]: hi, gl
ilFuria: I don't like this move much... It ensures no territory on the side or the corner whatsoever. The center of the board has to be explored later. See variations to explore some ideas
ilFuria: I don't like this one. There's so many space where to play, three undisputed corners, and most of the sides are not challenged yet. It is not clear what black wants to accomplish by this move here. The variations are better imo.
ilFuria: see move 19 for further comments, then the variations
ilfuria: moves from 14 to here are heavy and useless. The point is that there are 4 major zones in which black can make points, marked with triangles. The four marked stones neither make territory nor keep sente.
ilF: see the branch for alternatives
ilFuria: Nice move
ilFuria: this is kind ofan endgame move. It ensures only 2 more points while there is a huge part of the board still unexplored
Ilf: this move is actuallyok since you can seal the white group in...
The cutting group has killed twowhite groups but, instead of playing a 1 stone capturing move you'd better focus on the huge lands on the right and up sides
ilFuria: Well played
ilFuria: Useless move. The group was already dead. By playing this one you sacrifice sente. White can now try to make territory on the right side To answer your concerns: there's no "large group to keep captive". If you have to you kill. Otherwise you leave it there and play more point-wise in some other point of the board
ilFuria: Endgame move, too small. The corner is safe. think bigger.
Alcibaides [25k]: everything ok? Eldarin [17k]: eys
Alcibaides [25k]: where are you from?
ilFuria: The situation arisen by whitein this corner isn't that clear. I think that you shouldn't waste moves here but try to extend your control on the upper-right or the whole upper side
ilF: T10 is kind of an endgame move but you can play it since it is sente, menacing T6 and thecapture of the two white groups
I'd rather have played  Q11 to connect two weak groups with no eyes
ilFuria: the marked group is now dead
ilFuria: P12 isn't that good. Black should soon prevent the cuts at A and B, playing on the triangle spot, perhaps
ilF: 1) never use score estimator. Try to figure out hte score yourself. 2) There's an empty half board. The game is very far from the end
ilFuria: I'd have played on the upper side but here's ok too
ilFuria: you tend to play this form often. This is very very unstable and leaves  many cutting points.  you can exploit the same cutting points on the  opponent's formation or stabilize your position (next move withD14)
ilFuria: your opponent has stabilized his formation. you are leaving behind two cutting points and making and endgame move worth wery few. White can still invade in the upper left corner and in the upper center where he will have plenty of room for two eyes
ilFuria: wasted move! the group wasalready dead
I think this form is always seki... It was a difficult move but you should have prevented D17...
Here, I think that D17 would be a better direction, working efficiently with your D4 stone (see variation).
With this move, Black wants to build some influence, forcing White on the left side. White can pursue with the peaceful C15 (your move) or contest black's intention with D16.
Black D16 diverges from the joseki (see variation). Black stones look slightly heavy to me.
White's choice is not easy to make here; though your move looks fine to me, I would also consider White C17, which takes the corner (Black gaining influence in exchange) or White D14, which pushes towards the center, gaining some territory before acting at the top side. See variations.
Black makes shape at the top. This is a good move.
Nice move. This is an important point, helping the G17 stone and aiming at approaching the corner.
This move is slow. Not only does it give White a bad shape, but it also has no significant on black's shape at the top.  I think it's better to tenuki here, and take a bigger point (for instance A, B, C, D or E).
This move makes Black overconcentrated, and induces White G16, reinforcing the shape at the top. Black is helping White, here.
This move, I think, is a mistake.  At first sight, the idea behind O17 is excellent: combine an extension with an attacking move, thus maximizing the utility of O17.  However, White's shape is very thin at the top, and O17 invites black to make the splitting attack at M17. Black would legitimately expect to make huge profit, either capturing the top, or making O17 run towards the center and securing territory at the right during the chase.  Here, as White, I would choose either A or B.
Black courageously attacks.
Responding to M17 is not an easy task. The solution you chose certainly makes sense. I have shown another possible variation.
Excellent decision. Indeed, the cut at N5 does not seem to work (see variation).
This looks like the wrong direction to me. Black R16 gives more power to take the left side. See variation.
Black decides that the right side is better; good decision.
This move looks slow for Black. A play around Q10 looks powerful.
Excellent timing by White. However, I think that playing around Q10, one line higher, is better, because more influence-oriented.
A light play, maybe too thin, though. One could expect Black to pincer in a splitting attack, then chase Q4 to the left, making profit at the bottom side. See variation.
This choice by Black seems to favor White, since White will make shape following the joseki.
Now White has a much better shape.
Excellent timing. Also, this move induces an approach by Black around C6, which could then be pincered, playing a good extension with the C13 stone.
That is the good direction, White building a moyo.
Very strange move by Black.
C2 is doubtful, I think that Black should prefer C1, making shape. See variation.
This is quite a complex situation, I do not know whether White can kill Black directly - see variation.
Big mistake by Black, which loses the corner.
B7 is inaccurate, it is much better to remove the aji of C5, by capturing the stone immediately.  Of course, with B7 black cannot escape without being caught in a geta, but the bad aji still remains.
This move is too conservative, I think: territory should be made as a result of attacking, not for territory itself.  Consider the three marked Black stones; if reinforced, they can give Black formidable thickness to take territory at the bottom. However, if attacked, you can chase them from the center, securing your territory on the right side.  See an example variation that develops the idea.
Excellent decision by Black, who reduces White's moyo while expanding his own.
Good thinking, White can still make something here before Black starts using his thickness.
Why bend? Simply cut. I don't think Black can make much damage, see variation.
Black prevents White from getting to the center, but in this case this is too slow, because White can make sabaki at the bottom and try to spoil Black's moyo.
Good move, but also keep in mind that the F4 group can still be cut, and that it has no eyes (though it is, in reality, hardly killable). You may use that aji in your sabaki.
You have gotten a very interesting result with your variation, forming a moyo. However, I think that N5, capping at the bottom, is probably better than P12, which creates a weakness around Q11. See variation.
Black takes logically the big point, penetrating your moyo.
Why not sacrifice P12? See variation.
Hard to defend against this good move by Black.
Black ends in gote, but has annihilated White's moyo.
P8 looks a bit aji-keshi. What about Q13 now? See variation.
Ignoring White's peep is not wise.
This move does not work, because it leads White to a shortage of liberties.
P17 is needed, here.
Black does not miss this important hane.
White should try and complicate the situation with a ko at R19.
This, unfortunately, leads nowhere. White is dead.
Black has built a B2 Bomber! Very bad omen for White :)  http://senseis.xmp.net/?B2Bomber
N18 unneeded, loses one point locally and gives sente to White.
This White group looks a bit heavy, a play at J12 could be interesting.
Unneeded, loses one point locally, and gives White sente.
M9 forms bad shape and gives White sente.
Too small, therefore gote.
Dame.
Unneeded.
Unneeded - loses one point locally.
Unneeded - loses one point locally.
Unneeded - loses one point locally.  White wins by 1.5 moku.
Sotham [?]: hi Sotham [?]: have fun
Cyanure [3k?]: hi have fun
This acctualy is a little bit strange, but can be played. I would recomend something like O16 or a pincer.
Black is all on 4 line, this is not safe. White can invade at m4, m3 or even the 3-3 point.
W give away the Sente, d15 is ok but give the sente away is not ok. And even let D4 unprotected
Not a recommended move, this one don't protect or attack nothing. C7 would be better or c12.
Trapped.
I prefer H8
That's not a ko
Sotham [?]: sorry, missread Cyanure [3k?]: np Cyanure [3k?]: gg
this musn't connect
too gentle, let white connect
:o))
wrong place  triangle stones are stable group, square stone is the weak one to be saved  attack only when strong so first secure the square stone
??
remember the connection move to be done before A and B are both weak so its fair battle, but white has more influence
useless, the battle is for A group against B
good, make heavy before attack
? continue attacking
add another dead white stone
:o((
better at 'a' -------------
better at 'a' -------------
better at 'a' -------------
better at 'a' -------------   sure  :o))
* Triangled stones are a bit strong here and pressuring your stones. R3 would be better. See variation.
*See variation
* This is a good move. Both securing right side and severly pincering R14.
*Here white's only move is R17. See variation
Was this correct or should have moved to R 17  *Yes, blocking R14 is crutial here.  But it could also P13, snce you have some defending  stones around.
*White has a tesuji here. See variation for S17.
*White is heavy, Too hard to make eye
artboy598 [11k]: thx artboy598 [11k]: ok artboy598 [11k]: we can con tinue honjo23 [11k]: whenever i let people take back i ussually lose so this bodes well for u artboy598 [11k]: my com keeps freezing
*S11 is lets White live below but still good.
honjo23 [11k]: that was the same move
Was that good of me to regain the corner?  *Yes White still have to make move to live below. Meaning you have the sente. Morover you have a strong wall.  2 white stones attaching are very weak. You can make a big territory attacking them from left side.
*S8 is too small but a big sente.  Maybe KO threat later, yea?
*W missed T9 for life
odnihs [7k]: good boy :D  *White missed T9 for life. Now he has to  Q10 for second eye.
odnihs [7k]: now...PLAY Q10!!!!  I'm mad I missed that
*Again too small to capture 3 stones. It is about 5 points. A large scale attack above or reducing E4 is huge.
didn't want to get closed out of the center
I think white should have pincered because it would double as an extension  *True, Now the stones around M4 are all neutralized. G3 should be severe.
see, now i was able to get a base  *Yes, an ideal jump for a base is definetely great.
*K3 H5 K5 is moves are good.
odnihs [7k]: ...idiot  Would a good move for white be around c10?  *Yes could be.  But, first of all, white's position is not really balanced. Because E5 after C4 is not a popular move.  If it was E4 or D6 instead of E5, There could be ideal extensions for white, so ideal reductions for black.
*Since now you have 2 eye in R5 group you don't need to probe.  Big moves are J17, C3, D10
* You do not have much by these moves, Both groups live here.   A move like G16 is more important to block white in upper region.
odnihs [7k]: coulda killed it...-.-
odnihs [7k]: s2?
odnihs [7k]: or...nvm
*Big.
*This is nice too, you started playing good again.
*C12 is a bit small. May be Should hit by E13. See variation.
keep up pressure?
* White should jump G14, crutial mistake.
odnihs [7k]: DotDotDot... odnihs [7k]: what was that?  I was rather being safe than sorry  * He could run anyway, there is nothing wrong.
odnihs [7k]: you let him escape odnihs [7k]: -.-
*Touching here is a severe mistake. White should have covered by J15  or J16 calmly to capture that stone.
* P19 is big. See variation
artboy598 [10k]: how'd my rank go up? honjo23 [11k]: did it?
honjo23 [11k]: i guess your getting better
artboy598 [10k]: it was 11k like u
* H11 is too small maybe J10 / H9 or somthing else. "Kill 2 birds with one stone".  Moreover the stone at J12 is already dead. It has deniable aji.
*C3 was the biggest move (after P19)
*Good early end-game play by black.
*
*Simply T14 would work too.
too far should be at a7  * I am not sure if it is far, if i dont miss something. See variation.
*G1 is not needed.
* Why not fight Ko at L18?
artboy598 [10k]: we can leave dame, ok
honjo23 [11k]: sori-what is dame? artboy598 [10k]: nutral points
artboy598 [10k]: no one gains or loses
honjo23 [11k]: sure honjo23 [11k]: i think we might be there
R11 seems over concentrated for white usual is R10. Right? g4: Yes it is. R10 is slightly better.
Is S9 good or better more cautious S8? g4: Seems to me as a matter of taste. R9 puts more pressure on white, which is good.
g4: This is an overplay.
g4: This leaves the possibility to vonnect the white stones. I would have played Q9 or R10. It is important to split stones to leave them weak.
g4: sShould be at S9, see var
ktomm [6k]: where is your picture taken?
Q12 did not lead to great result. Maybe overplay? g4: Black is strong. Can't be overplay I think.
sronen71 [6k]: between Banff and Jasper, canada
g4: Should be at L9 for speed.
g4: This is an overplay. The top right white group is not alive. It seems important for both sides toplay around O14/N15. Even if the black corner gets small, getting profit from attacking the white group seems bigger.
g4: Should be at N4, see var.
g4: Good. Compare this to the variation
g4: Why?
g4: tenuki?
maybe s6 was not so good, s5 better? g4: I think this is best if you want to play in this region. It secures the black group above or takes away eye space from the group below.
g4: Good
g4: Very small  and gote
g4: Great move.
g4: Overplay. M14 or better N15.
g4: Unnessecary, better leave it for ko.
white settled
maybe S13 would have been better. g4: Now white has the head in the center. He cannot be killed. Taking away eye space is far to small. Both moves are gote. Black has to run with the black stones into the center
g4: Good fighting spirit.
g4: Loses a ko threat. White cannot be killed. Playing moves only becaus they are sente is not always good.
g4: Good
g4: Too small.
g4: Good
g4: Very late and not easy to live wihtou giving white too much territory.
g4: Better at C17 to establish a base, see var
g4: Better to put pessure on the two black stones. perhaps with C10.
g4: Black has a base, this is good for him.
seing white big moyo at bottom I looked for invasion. Is this good point? g4: This move is normally played, when black can react different regarding whites answer. In this position, because of the white stone at D7 black seems white to allow white to stabilize his moyo.
g4: Correct.
g4: Why not C6?
g4: Just C6 is good enough. This may backfire.
g4: Better see var.
g4: Unnessecary
what are the big moves on the board now? my idea was to reduce white moyos up and bottoms and make a moyo for black in middle. g4: White seems to lead by 10 points. Remember to keep your opponents weak stones separated. I would prefer A8.
g4: Good
C14 took me by surprise g4: Forestalls the black moves at C16 follwed by B15 which would take territory with a former weak group.
bit strange. g4: simply doesn't work.
g4: Helps black to  protect his weakness. White should look for a move around N18. Look for var.
I figured out this should be bigger then saving few stones g4: Good
g4: Why not take the ko once?
maybe n18 better
I think N17 would be better
g4: N18, T4 seem bigger
perhaps defence in top right corner is needed, such as T15  Now the game seems very close, so I would appreciate evaluation of the yose play
g4: Too early from Black. This is a 3 step KO. Taking big endgame moves is better.K2,  A2, N18 are bigger.
in view of this move perhaps I had to defend earlier against it Now the game is pretty close, so I would apprecaite evaluation of the yose play. g4: Nothing to fear. Bear in mind, that you didn't defend S14. So you can't defend it now. At end end of these moves white gsined nothing but the stone at S14.
g4: This may be deadly. See var.
g4: Better to take the Ko, at least once.
g4: T4.
g4: Not neccessary now.
g4: T4. Locally T8 is bigger. Playing all other sente moves first. M10,K11 etc.
g4: Great
g4: Too risky. White can't lose the ko.
g4: S3
g4: Dame point.
g4: Yes
g4: Bigger than the ko.
s> Hello D'mitri, It is my pleasure to comment on your game.  Here are the possible places to change: 4: D15 early moves between his plays. 19: Q14 too much on the 4th row 24: E3 white need to use his strength. 69: K6 try attacking indirectly by cutting off a group 80: G5 white misses a chance to cut off 4 stones. 107: J13 try using a net rather than atari 115: H13 seems like "pass" 123: M7 attack from a distance. 205: H19 endgame move to kill upper left corner. 217: O7 threaten from outside : 2 points. 269: S4 keep up the ko, another threat at D17  I see you strong in the opening and middle game.  I think you lost steam near the end, missing some chances to capture a bit of space, and giving up too soon on the ko fight.
s> I think that approaching D17 with D3 behind is helping white develop, I would suggest something closer to C10.
I know I extended the wrong way.  Should have been at (e,16) right?  I just learned that joseki so I forgot.  s> E16 seems to connect with D15 and lean into K16 more, threatening growth into F18.  I like how F17 grows influence.
Did I still play this out well?  s> it does seem consistent with other moves, Q16, Q4 and later E5 area are all for influence.  The danger is that you are forcing the opponent to get territory.
Would it have been better to extend from my top left group to ( L,17) or around that area?  s> I think Q10 works well with Q4, Q16 and G17.
Was that a good answer?  s> It seems too high to make eye space, but maybe that's ok.  I do like pushing from G17, to get it more of a footing.  If you had N17 for example, white may J17 and G17 has a hard time making a base.
I thought that it was good to take the last big point in the opening.  s> nice play
I thought that this shouder hit was timed pretty well.  s> It is really fun to play these types of things.  White already has the corner, so why not get something going.  Although in this case white has too much strength for this to work out I think.  Maybe play lightly, allowing a stone or two to die, while building up around his attack.
I was going for influence.  s> white ends up over concentrated, using too many stones to defend that area.
s> If you are trying to attack and maybe kill O17, then move further away, not making contact.  touch = defending, distant = attacking.
Was it good to tenuki here because I ended up losing the corner.  s> yes, I thik it is worth it.  O17 seems alive, so losing R17 stones doesn't change life / death.
Right here is where I lost it.
Should I have played a hane at the other side? s> I would do a single step extension to the edge with K3.
Did I make the right choice or should I have gave atari to the ( L,4) stone?
I think this is how I fell behind.
Was this move really nessesary?  s> good point, there are many moves in this game that are extra, and don't seem to have a big effect.  It is a good sign to see a player thinking "why make this move, can I just skip it?
Now that I think about it, I should have reinforced that stone at ( h, 11)  seems like "pass" here
How could I have stopped this from happening?  s> after curring N6 from M5, it has to run to safety, try fighting from a distance.  Contact plays = help both sides get stable.  Distant plays = attack.
I think extending the (o,9) would have worked .  s> looks like a great alternative.
I think I could have cut at (p,10) instead and even if white connected at (r,11) I could monkey jump to ( T, 12) and still live.  s> I think monkey jumps are good for stealing territory, but I don't think they help with making eyes.
see what i'm saying.  s> looks like you traded N8 for Q13, a good trade for black.
i think this was a wasted move by my friend.  s> white keeps maybe 10 points
I thought that I got the coner back here.  s> the ko fight paid off well for black. :)
s> move = 1 point, G18, K11 more.
I REALLY think that should have been at ( k,5)
I think this is why I lost.
Lost it *sigh*
This was nessesary to save my group.
I play the kakari because i'm having a hard time dealing with chinese fuseki .
This is the first worst move (I think). And honestly, I dont know what to do next, so the next move is mostly an imitative move without any real reason .  [K]: This move is odd.. black is trying to attack you 2 much. He should play S3 (see variations). But now white need to be careful when trying to punish. B is the right move, see variation to check why.
[K]: I am quite sure it is bad move, Q4 looks much better.
[K]:White is in trouble now.
[K]:Probably you  should give up R3 stone, see variation.
[K]: Looks bad.. you can not capture black stones in here.
[K]: S3 was big mystake... Now you can safe your stones in the corner but at really big cost, see variation.
The corner is big, so this is a total failure for me .
[K]:Too slow! You should play fast as you are behind already.
Black move is aggresive but hard to counter, black is strong so he can fight, maybe you shouldn't choose this pincer.
Would P11 or P12 better than this move ?  [K]:This is attacking move, i don't think you can attack when R8 and R12 are so weak.
[K]:I think he made mystake here.
[K]:This is bad :(
[K]:I think you can not live in corner directly, but you can reduce it by a lot. See variation.
Is is possible for the corner to live now ?   [K]:I am quite sure it is impossible now.
[K]:Bad shape and move, only helping black to get more points.
[K]:Black is so happy to get this move for free. Later he can connect with T12 now so you only damaged yourself.
Oh.. dead in gote!
[K]: Black could tenuki and finish you off now. See variation.
[K]:Losing ko treats, not worth to play it.
Up until now , I think I'm on the way to gain back the lost in the lower right corner  [K]:I disagree, you are losing by a lot, black to 2 huge corners and white got almost no points, if not black mystake at R18 game would be over already.
[K]:Bad point for invasion, F3 area seems better.
Does the 3 moves exchange good for me ?  [K]:Not really, you still have no base and black gained F3 for free.
[K]:This is quite slow move by him you have chanse to run now.
[K]:For sure this move is overplay, white can take corner but his group at outside looks  terrible after it.
[K]:Bad. B5 is probably the best shape. Now black should just capture i think.
[K]:This is also good for him.
[K]:I think this is bad shape for you, what if he just capture?
[K]:You are really lucky here, black overplayed by a lot, see variation on what he could do.
[K]:So slow! You missed great chanse to attack him! See variation.
[K]:This is just wrong dirrection, your big hope is center, you shouldn't ask black to run into it! and that E12 move is not protecting corner, black can still make life there by playing C17.
Is this move a mistake , should i continue to jump at G12 or G11 instead ? At first , i thought this is a normal move- not good, not bad . But after black play G12, i think it's a completely bad move .  [K]:Yea it is definetly 2 slow.
[K]:Cutting here is good idea, you have to fight to get back into game.
[K]:Same sacrifice... Well black got so many points here that you need to get really big center or kill him, B3 or H4 are just huge!
[K]:Wrong! See variation.
Now, the corner is alive, isn't it ?  [K]:Yes it is, white made mystake here.
Instead of this move , should i invade directlly somewhere around N16 ? .  [K]:Maybe that is same idea, however you can't reduce black by a lot there, see variation.  But for sure you should try to take more, anything to build big center would be good.
[K]:Black overplayed here so you got a lot of points from him.
[K]:After this you got a lot of points! black gave you chanse to win just at the end of game!
[K]:See variation.
I was wondering why my opponent play S9 and S8, and that lost me the game :) .  [K]:This move is terrible! He is just hoping for you to make mystake.
[K]:Good idea, white group is not yet alive here.
[K]:This is very weak move :( You should extend to H2.
[K]:So small! Now black just need to finish you at T12..
[K]:Game over... So about game, you made many mystakes in the begining that gave black huge lead. For sure you need to work on your reading, result at bottom right corner is terrible, big mystake at S19 to - he made mystake because you killed yourself in gote! And few more mystakes that were made because of reading( I guess you missed tesuji at T12). Ofcourse you also menaged to get same points back but lost from the start was just too big!  So for sure a lot of work on reading should be your priority. And same problems about invading, direction of play or shape  can't be bad as well.    Hope I helped a bit. Have a good day!
[Eranorn] I think this is too close. White might be able to play around A to bother you. Look at the variation.
Is the C10 stone overreach? If yes, how can I invade that area?  [Eranorn] You might be able to invade near A later, but now it's really not appropriate. To invade here, you need to have a strong position somewhere close, else you will only create a weak black group and get into trouble.
Did my F17 stone place correctly? Or should I play at C14 instead?   [Eranorn] There are josekis starting with the move at r10, you can check that in Kogo's joseki library (also look at the variation). I don't know if it's good or bad to leave the situation as it is for now, but personnaly I don't see anything wrong in F17. Anyway I think C17 is better than C14. If you play C14 you'll be pincered and have no possibility of extension. And you wouldn't take into account the potential of Q16 which will be weakened.
Did my F13 stone invade too early or too late?  [Eranorn] I'm not sure you need to focuse already on this 25 points area. This is the only place where white has points, and you have so many places where you can build something.
[Eranorn] Very bad : this is an empty triangle, this black group is very weak. Even if white pley there, you can still connect F14, even if those stones are worth almost nothing at this point of the game.
[Eranorn] I don't understand E11.
[Eranorn] I think this is an important play, this is good.
[Eranorn] This is too flat. Taking into account the influence you got around H13, you should play around A.
[Eranorn] This is not worth enough compared to the moyo.
[Eranorn]It is a weird shape, but it prevents from making the moyo (I'm not sure if it's good anyway).
[Eranorn] Maybe you could play a little bit wider, with R7... The white group is still weak.
Would there be something wrong if I play P7?  [Eranorn] Maybe. It's a little bit unusual and the bottom area doesn't look safe to me. This is also gote so if we play a gote stone, it is probably better to play it around N3.
How could I avoid the invasion of the white N3 stone?  [Eranorn] I think you can't avoid it...
[Eranorn] Empty triangle...
[Eranorn] Too passive, not worth enough. A or B are worth more, especially B this time.
[Eranorn] A still.
From the 69th step till this 77th step, could there be other methods to invade white's territory for more points?  [Eranorn] As I said, it would be better to make your own moyo at the tope instead of worrying about this small area for the moment. I don't think you've got an efficient way to reduce the white area.
I feel something wrong with this N8 stone. Would there be a better place that I can play?
[Eranorn] YOu're protecting the smallest area. Look at the top (sorry to insist ;)  )
[Eranorn] It now comes naturally for white... This is threating your top area, so you need to defend instead of having built the moyo before.
[Eranorn] Starting from now, you play koyose and yose, so I won't make further comments.  If you should remember some things, they are not to focuse only on opponent's area. Look at the whole board, look what you've got and what he has got. If he has more, you need to build a bigger moyo or to invade. If you've got more, you don't need to play dangerously, like invading, creating weak groups and so on. Try to learn what is big and what is small, to compare area and moyos, and judge what is best from their size.  That's all for me, bye !
---- Usual answers to Black F3 include White D6 or C6. Thanks to your stone at D10, D6 would be great, as it would help you build a nice moyo. Instead, O17 creates a weakness in your framework. Indeed, even if Black takes the time to answer around Q13, he will still have the opportunity to either pincer around M17 or to invade the bottom left corner.  Trying to extend your moyo on the upper side is not a bad idea though. But because of what I said, you could consider a less aggressive expansion around K16.
---- Black stays quite low on the bottom.
---- This is a bit premature. Your sides are still quite weak, especially the left side, and you're already aiming at the middle. Remember that there is much fewer points in the center than in the sides. For the same reason you could consider an invasion at R17 or around the upper right side, although I think D6 is definitely better here.
---- Good direction, as it will push Black against your stones on the right, and L13 might actually prove to be useful in a fight.
---- This is too aggressive. When Black invades, your first reaction should not be : how do I kill Black? But : how do I prevent Black from getting too big while reinforcing my position to get bigger myself? This is why instead of trying to cut Black (which also weakens you) you should consider a play around D14. D14 would reinforce your moyo on the left, Black will have to run to the center or to the right, but your stones on the right will give him some trouble.
---- This leaves a weakness at E18. Moreover, at this point of the game it is more important to reinforce your moyo than to get a few more points on the lower lines. If you really want to strengthen this direction, D17 is better as it leaves no weakness, whereas now your group at C16 is weak. Strengthening this group would be important to have a strong base in the corner, that you could try and extend in the direction of D10.
---- Black takes advantage of your weakness right away and your stone at F18 doesn't look very useful anymore.
---- I guess you already realized this was an easy mistake ;) Note that after Black captures F15, he almost have a ponnuki, which is worth a lot as his stones radiate in all directions (well except to the top in this particular game).
---- Here is the almost-ponnuki.
---- This play does not block Black: he can continue at H17. If you want to block Black you should play moves such as H17. If your intention was to kill Black, this is hopeless as he can run at H17 until you give up, and then kill your group at E17. Anyway, there are bigger moves such as D6 or D14. O15 would help you build a moyo and prevent Black from joining his groups. F5 is also a possibility to keep Black low on the lower side.
---- This is a common mistake. Black can answer C18 and capture your stone, making your move useless.
---- Black L17 achieves several things: - it puts pressure on your group at H16, - it pincers your stone at O17 somehow (although your stone at L13 will help you if you run to the center), - it is an invasion that threaten to divide your moyo.  So the fight on the left has really weakened you because you tried to kill instead of trying to reinforce yourself. Now you have to: - somehow make use of the stones at O17 and O13 (possibly with R17 or around R14), - save your group at H16, - strengthen your moyo on the left, - prevent black from using his newly gained strength in the upper left corner to divide you on the left side.  Most likely you cannot do all this, of course, so you will have to choose what's the most important. But Black also has weaknesses you can exploit: - his group in the upper left corner is not settled, it needs more space, - you can still invade the upper right corner or split the right side. The first weakness can be exploited to strengthen your left side by chasing Black on a LARGE scale (not by fighting). The invasion on the right could help you establish a base, taking advantage or your stone at O17.  Having all that in mind, J17 does not seem to be so great: it will only strengthen Black. Instead, consider something such as: - C14 or D14 which strengthens your side but does not put that much pressure on Black (although it prevents an invasion which would settle him), - Q14 which should allow you to split Black and help your stones but will lead to a complicated fight, - R17 which should help you, along with O17, to have a base in the corner (but Black will most likely have a wall which will help him a lot in the upper center so this is maybe not a good idea), - D6 which is very important.
---- This actually helps Black, as you invite him to cut at K17, which: - strengthens his stone at L17, - cuts you and most likely kill the stone you just played at K18, - continues the attack on your L group at J16.  Although for Black, cutting at K17 is not the only option IMO (for instance J14 attacks your group on a larger scale while reinforcing his group on the left).
---- If you want to save your L group, this is too far away. J14 would be safer, although it is likely to reinforce Black's position as he will chase you.
---- Now it is too late for D6 and you have even more weaknesses as you have more groups to care about.  Notice how your stones are all split and do not really communicate, whereas the Black stones still form a moyo on the bottom and on the right.
---- This contact play invites Black to play E7 to reinforce himself.
---- This move eventually substracts one liberty from your L group. It had 3 liberties before, and now you invite Black to play L16, leaving you with only 2 liberties. You should focus on the other parts of the board, because right now, your group is dead. You can still use it as a threat though... as long as you don't force Black to capture it as you are doing with K16.
---- With more practise you will be able to read these moves and see that your group is already dead.
---- Black J14 would kill the White group instantly. Well, this works too.
---- I already pointed out C14 several times, but your move here at D15 is good too, although it will weaken your stones around E17 as Black is invited to answer E16.
---- Another possibility here would be to play D14 and aim at joining your stones on the bottom. Your choice is not bad though compared to D14.
---- Your move at D8 was most likely to be answered this way, I was surprised this didn't happen sooner :) Notice how Black is nicely strenghened with this move here - keep that in mind when you play contact moves such as D8.
---- Black splits even more, making your stone at D4 very, very lonely, and reducing your territory on the left a lot.
---- Taking one stone is not important (remember that Black can capture your group at J16, or K18, with only one play, so you cannot capture his group). Try to focus on bigger moves, especially around the lower left and the upper right.
---- This is quite slow from Black who could have prefered: - a play around Q14 to prevent you from invading or splitting here, - a play around the center to frame a bigger moyo, - a play around F5 to make your stone even more lonely, - a play around F9 to reduce your extension possibilities, while framing a bigger moyo.
---- This move only forces Black to capture, so it is not really important, and Black will have less weaknesses for you to exploit in the end-game. Try to find bigger moves. This remark is valid for many other plays from here but I will stop repeating it :)
---- Good.
---- Not really urgent. You still have one big point to take at R17 or Q14/R14. (Your stone at D4 is better left dead for now - you may be able to use it later when fighting for the middle).
---- Too slow again.
---- A big play for Black.
---- Again too slow. Your wall is beautiful and very strong but does not encloses as much territory as Black's scarcer plays on the right.
---- Very, very slow: moves on the first lines should be kept for the very end. Moreover, you could have played at A7 if you wanted to play on the first line.
here is when I formed my territory, after that I got kinda lost...  ---- Do not try to finish your territory in the middle game while there are some space left in the center or anywhere else.  You are lost now because your stones on the upper right quarter and the lower left quarter are almost hopeless anyway. You can not gain any more substantial territory here. The only thing you can do is to prevent Black from making too much territory himself, especially in the center. See how the board is empty between E10 and O3: this is where things will take place now (the marked area is to be contested). Your stone at L13 can still help for this purpose.
---- Very, very, very slow. It is only worth half a point.
---- This, on the opposite, is big as it helps Black to form a bigger moyo, which is what you should prevent. The same remark is true for your other moves from here.
---- See how you let Black have this big moyo. 2 of his last 3 stones at H9, L11 and N11 could have been White! :)
---- H10 would be slightly better here.
---- You can not hope to save this group: - you have no space to make 2 eyes, - it cannot connect to any living group (any group at all actually), - it cannot capture any Black group to make space for living.
---- Well, you're discovering the shicho (ladder) ^^
---- This actually helps Black to capture you as you now have only one liberty left at N15. He would have captured anyway, so you're giving him one free point.
This is the risk when, as white, your 3-4 point faces a black star point.  This is an ideal approach for black particularly if black is an influence or moyo type player.  My usual response to something like this is attach and extend, getting the corner and sente and trying to make up for it after. (see variation) It may be a bad idea!  I can't say I'm recommending it.  You may want to pincer and start a fight.  I think tenuki is also ok here but keep in mind black is building an outside position and do something about it soon.
Other than responding to E4, this is the biggest spot on the board, but it is playing black's game a little.
I think this is wrong.  The idea of r17 is to settle in the corner.   If you settle in the corner and he gets influence facing his star point, you are still playing his game.  The high approach in the lower left is a signal of the kind of game he wants.  There are two usual responses to the high two space pincer and both emphasize white getting out.  White must get out.  See variations.
Black profited from the exchange of Q18 and Q15.  Q18 is an effort to settle and make life in the corner.  You need to get out and keep black separated.  It is too soon to seek safety.  This exchange is still playing black's game.  See variation for move 14.
This attachment winds up making M16 very strong.  Don't touch a weak stone.  Play at a distance and try to keep it weak or take the initiative.  I tried P15 but that is a lousy variation.  I am beginning to think ... tenuki.  See the other variations.  The gist of it is that I think white's corner can live or escape if black attacks.  Meanwhile you have to take the initiative in stopping black's build up of power on the right.  Black's occupation of Q15 makes an effective moyo game on the right and all of the variations are chancy for white.  The q15 group and the Q4 stone work well together.
Out!  Very good.
This is a difficult way to invade.  I'm sure exactly what to think of it.  Usually this kind of move starts a sacrifice or sabaki effort.  If it were me, I would invade more conventionally on the bottom right, perhaps 03, build a strong group and consider invading later.  Black profits, but we're playing a territory game then and I am on my comfortable ground (and, I suspect, yours).  A difficult invasion like this will typically trade reducing part of a moyo for securing or strengthening the rest of it.  You want to do it when you know that trade off is to your advantage.  Here, most of the board is still quite open.  This move, which turns out to be a success locally reducing 20 or more points, gives black a lot of outside power for the occupation of those open areas.
This worked out well and it may be the right move, but I'd point out that it is not "sabaki." You've invested more in the R10 stone and made a heavy group, which now has to live or escape or you suffer a big loss.  Sabaki would be a crosscut or hane here, expecting to lose some stones to get a flexible position to fight from.
risky.  I'm not sure P12 wouldn't be better.  See variation.
This move is another signal from black.  Black knows you will connect here (making your invasion locally a success as a reduction of black's potential territory.)  In addition to costing him territory and giving up an attack on your right side invasion force, he also knows he needs another move to secure his corner, so he's giving up sente.  He's doing this to secure a thick wall from L17 to R9.  He evidently likes thickness and likes the outside.  Of course, your next move is forced, so there's nothing to do about it now.  But it is an indication that your invasion, a local success, did keep the game progressing by his script.
Black is alive and you have sente.
Ok, his wall isn't that secure.  Correct push by you.
A thick move by black.  He wants his position strong.
I think I understand the idea here.  Threaten black's top group, stake a claim on some points, since you don't have any yet.  but I don't like H16.  G17 or F17 is more my style. (G17 is black's ideal point there.) Better claim on the corner, stronger position to move out from.  I'd also be tempted to play M13.  Black would play the ideal point at G17, but that's a territory move and I'd have sente to do something else.  Your move might be better than that.
An interesting move by black.  It doesn't connect him by itself but it has some flexibility.  I'd push out from here.  See variation.
Wrong!  Your group is alive.  So is his even if he doesn't answer this.  This is a big endgame move.  You are not within endgame range of him if he secures the bottom and center.  You need to move down there or at M13 or somewhere else now!
Wrong again! He doesn't need to answer you.  He should move at K4, if he wants to start harvesting points, or M13 if he wants more thickness.
And wrong again.  This is a 5-10 point move.  Your groups are both safe.  Move down on the bottom.
He figured it out first and played a big move. C4 is safe, but will probably be confined to the corner.  Look at the overall position here.  On the one hand, you have probably 15 points upper right, twenty points upper left, discounting for thinness and 5 points in the lower left, expandable to 10-15.  He has 10 points or less in the upper right and probably 10 safe points in the lower right and another 10 along his wall.  The bottom and lower right and center are still open and you can fight for them.  You have small nominal lead.  _But_  Look at what the stones you've both played are good for.  His group of 11 stones in the upper right have netted him 5-10 points (depending who plays at S16) and is wholly sealed in.  Your group of 20 stones up top have netted you about 15-20 points and have two small exit points.  Over the rest of the board, you have three thin scattered stones.  He has 16 stones over the rest of the board, two sealing you in lower left, a star point lower right, and a great wall with one small hole it in dominating the center, the bottom and the right.  Anything you throw in there is going to be at a severe disadvantage.  He semi-sacrificed the possibilities for his upper right group to build up power and now he is going to use it.  This is a terribly hard game for white now.
Still his game.  I'd still have been tempted by E3.  That or give up the corner and invade the lower side now.
this develops from the top left, but it is still thin.  Meanwhile it is close to the strong D7 stones.  It doesn't threaten them by the way.  The whole meaning of this move is to claim points in the upper left.
I don't think this is the right invasion.  Aside from being one move (or 20 moves) too late.  It is a high, reducing, capping move.  It needs to be able to get security from elsewhere, but it is deep, deep in black territory.  It has no access to the edge for making life.  I will still invade along the edge or in the corner and hope to come out of it with sente to reduce from some other spot.
Loose ladder.  If the idea was a ladder breaker, black has you here.
endgame.  You are 60 points behind now, being generous.  Yose doesn't help.  (in any case, T7 is better yose move.  Black can make a ko, but so far behind, you can't be afraid of kos.
Good.  You need a fast move here.
Black correctly pushes you towards his thick wall and puts stones where they can limit your profits in the upper left.
forcing move to move you along.  Good.
Not sure this attachment is right
Wouldn't it be nice now if you'd moved to M13 instead of S18 or S9.
No.  You cannot let the K9 group die and this exchange does that.  J14 is urgent.  Can't promise you'd escape and H17 does damage your top terribly, but you don't have a lot of choices now.  If not J14 that you need to concentrate on killing black's top side group, but I don't see how.
Note his decision here.  He gave up some chance to reduce upper left to keep his group alive but also, more crucially, to make sure your center group died.
I think black could have played e3 safely, but I can't fault his decision to keep your center group dead at all costs.  Haveing that group dead towers over the rest of the game, keeping you from profiting on the left or successfully invading and keeping him well ahead in points.
Your move was sound and profitable.  H5 again signals he wants to keep your center dead and win the won game.
Not right.  C13 would be good timing.  h5 already tells you he's not that fussed about what happens in the lower left and you need more points and to make C10 useful.
Trouble
Playing form the wrong side.  Black can d14 so you cannot connect c10 to the corner.  Strong black stones all around.  Either you live or die in situ.
You are making more strong black stones
hurts corner but makes possible eye space
Now you need to try to make two eyes.  E17 not meaningful.  Corner fine without it.
removing aji
no danger to black there
not meaningful
this is lightly profitable but not vital.  Because of B7, the left group is not safe.  You should move there and hope to bluff your way to life.  K2 is also a bigger reduction.
black remains focused on the main event
All fine moves but not enough and the last few, prompting black's K3 and K2, make a corner invasion harder.
An amazing move.  This sort of thing always trips me up too.  I think it works because, unlike the usual 3-3 invasion, white has absolutely no place to run and no outside help.  You can't kill p2 and you can't make an eye outside.  Maybe S4 will work (I'll try in a sec) but the real answer is the previous move.  It should be at q2, not q3.
For some reason I really like the feel of this opening.  Hi. Im Claudio Mera and I ll review your game. My coments will start with CM. It is good, if you are open for changes.
I didn't see the next move coming.  Is there a way to prevent that move, as well as keep at least some territory on the side?
CM: I think is equal game so far. The variation on the right its ok, so you could keep less territory on the side and white the influence.
CM: you need fight and win at this point, see the variation
CM small at the time
better M13
ryuunet [8k]: hi Otacon [8k?]: hi
should it have been safer to approach at f17 or f16?  C14 is a good move, very common.  F17 is also a reasonable choice.  F16 is a little bit unsual in this situation.  So I would stick to F17 or C14
i could have extended one space further but my opponent said no undo  Yes c11 is better.  Misclicks happen to the best of us =).  TIll this result is not a disaster, very playable for black.
Your intuition playing the B move is very good.  A is too high for this position and B is the vital point.  However, It is a little bit too early to attack .  It is preferable to continue with the opening and wait for an ideal time to attack.  For example, if black got thick in the center his attack at B would be much more severe.
THis result is very good for white.  WHite has sente, nice thickness and a ponnuki on the side of the board.  In exchange black got about 6 points.  Thats why its is preferable to wait to punish whites overplay at q11
This is unnecessary, better to tennuki.
This move is not great because it removes some of black's flexibility.  The A stone already has some help from the B stone so it doesn't need extra help at D2.  The problem with the D2 move is that it removes the 3-3 invasion (for later too early for it now) see variation.
A bit slow , not worth too much.  Perhaps h17 is better?
how should i have dealt with this?  White's split white and attack =) (exactly what you did)
this move is great!  You might also consider leaning on whites strong stone at p6 for strength.  (see variation)
White is still weak keep attacking! ( see variation)
i started to invade at h17 but i was scared  H17 is possible but its too early now.  A good strategy would be to continue attackign m5 group.  You probably won't be able to kill it but instead you could stear the attacin in such a way that you get some thickness in the center.  Then it becomes much easier to do h17 invasion if you want to. (see variation)
This move is not so great.  Think about what you are trading.  Black gets two points white gets to secure his area at A
A is better
good move
unnecessary
This is a but slow
at least i got a seki, lol
Otacon [8k?]: ur good
PaperClip [1k]: hi nouanda [2k]: hi
nouanda [2k]: gg
I knew the usual continuation for black was to take the r3 stone. Is this the best way to respond to q2?  I actually don't know, but I'm sure this will suffice. If I had to choose, I would probably play p4 though.
I prefer the pincer at 'a' as B might get interesting later.
Is this what I should've played here? or should I play somewhere else?  I think black is over-extended with the marked stones. I would prefer attacking them.
This shape for white is already pretty shaky.
The marked stone seems very misplaced (see variation).   You follow up is very stressed. You should worry about your lower right group.
=/
I think A is possible the next many moves.
This is good, your staying alert.
this is not good because black 'should' play 'a' and avoid the following sequences. White should also play 'a'.
You can also play J2 (var.) but I actually prefer the game. So, well done :)
After I played this, I regretted it.
This is a weird move.  As for white, I think you should have just played it safe with White-a, Black-b, white-c
I would have preferred B to be at A now.
I guess this was too slow. I couldn't kill black anyway.  Yes, this is big endgame only.
I would be happy with A as white now
Okey, this situation is a little strange, because it has alot of attacks in one setting. Let's take a look.  Variation:
I think after looking through those variations, this move starts looking like an overplay.
I think 'A' is black dead (but my tsumego could be alot better ^^) (var)
I think is A white dies in the corner.  Try to read it out yourself, before you view the variations.
This is a little hurried. You need some preparation first.
This is really bad from black. 'a' is correct.
I prefer 'a'
'a' is more reasonable.  Anyway, the game has been over for a while, and the rest of the game is just a mess, really.
MR: The more usual move is R10.
MR: Exchanging R9 against R14 prior to F3 would be an alternative.
He spoiled my plan here. I was hoping for the c6 k4 variation.  Now, here I know just two josekis, c3 and f5. c3 seemed not so good, because it makes my q4 stone undevelopable (or so I thought, now as I look at it, I still have r8 to develop in sente and then I can get p3, so his wall would be ineffective, is that right?). So I decided to create a wall with f5 and thought I can get something out of attacking r11 later...  MR: C3 and F5 are at least two of the standard continuations locally. I personally would prefer to take the corner, as the prospects of the wall you build with F5 ff are more than unclear.  With respect to the continuation on the right side: You could have exchanged R9 (not R8 (!)) for R14 prior to F3.
MR: If you like whole board fighting, K3 might be an alternative for J4.
MR: The problem here is that you continue to build a wall and it is still totally unclear for what you want to use the wall. The wall does not make territory, does not build a moyo and has no weak opponent group in front to attack. Worse, it is not too unlikely that you end in gote locally, so that white can play R8 to strengthen his right side group.
Bad direction? I wasn't sure about starting from r13, because the wall isn't very strong around q4 and I thought it would be like throwing the whole wall away for nothing. Like this, I thought i was making the wall stronger, while r11 can still be attacked.  Or is the whole idea of attack r11 wrong and my l4 wall is just plain useless?  MR: Attacking R11 is the only sensible idea I see to do "something" with your wall. At the bottom, locally the problem is W P4, B P5, W Q5.
My plan here is clear, I want to push him against my wall and build something on the top. Is this a correct way of thinking or should i just leave him be for now and get some big point like k16?  MR: Strange direction. I would continue with P10. Driving the white group against the top edge is a good idea as you can make territory in the center and/or on the upper edge in the meantime.
MR: This is the move white anyway wanted to play. It strengthens the white group and neutralizes your wall.
MR: You again start to build a wall without having an extension (e.g. F17, F15).
This was a surprise to me. What should I do here? I continued to attack, because that was my strategy and I thought if I won't follow it, I will lose, because I thought he was ahead. But now, as I look at it, he isn't much ahead. He has territory around m2, which looks the same as my shimari at r17 and except that, he doesn't have anything. And influence-wise, I think I am better here and he still has a not so strong group in the middle of my stones. So is black all right in this game?  MR: To me, the white move does not come as a surprise, as he wants to forstall your extension on the upper edge.   In my opinion, white is better of in the game as a) he has the influence on the left side, b) he has territory on the lower edge with the option to cut off the lower right corner, c) black only has territory in the upper right corner and a wall on the lower side that he still has to make use of (i.e. it is not too difficult for white to make the wall useless).
Not so sure about this move. But anything else is letting him have a definite base, which I didn't like.
MR: R8 instead of T9 would be the standard continuation.
He insisted on tenuki all the time. And it made me really nervous :-) Is that group of his really so strong and unimportant that he can just tenuki? I think black could attack more strongly now (and also sooner), push white really against his wall at l4 and make something in the center. However, I am not sure what's the best way to go about it.  MR: White's strategy is to take the big points on the board and to leave you with the situation that you either have to kill the group or at least have to enclose territory with your wall while attacking.   I personally would play O8 to make the black center stones work together. However, white anyway can start the ko with S9. It appears to be difficult to really kill the white group.
I want to create a moyo here. It seems a bit amateurish and I know walls shouldn't be used like this, to create territory directly, but what else can I do? Maybe invade at f17, split his stones, and use the wall to attack j17? Is that possible?  MR: F17 seems strange to me as white can make an extension for his J17 stone with M17. The usual idea would be to invade at 3x3 (C17) in the corner and afterwards to cap with E10.
MR: I see, similar idea ...
E10 looks like a vital point, but I missed it. Should I have taken it, instead of g14?  MR: Yes.
Not sure about this move. I thought like this: "If white walks into my potential territory, I will walk into his." But I have more potential I think, so this would be a bad trade for black. If so, what is the best way to defend the central territory?  MR: Not so easy. You have to calculate F12 and H12 and choose a variation that you can cope with.
MR: Should be at F12.
From here and later in the game, white played lot of small and unimportant moves, which is the reason I won later, I think. This is one of them. But maybe I am just missing some tesuji for invasion, so I will better ask the reviewer :-) Is it all right for white to tenuki here? Or did he just count with me to answer at g9 (which I did, but now I think that's unnecessary as well...).  MR: Ok, now you got one of the standard results of playing F11 directly - and one of that results that are good for black ...
MR: Answering here is ok, I think.
Again, white ended in gote, so I could take his corner away.
This is a bad mistake, right? White should take r3 corner before black plays there...  MR: Yes, the black invasion at C3 should be gote for black.
Another unimportant move?
I captured firmly, but it looks completely unnecessary. A move like o6 is nicer, or even better, tenuki to something bigger?  MR: Why not simply P5?
MR: Aji keshi, see prior variation.
I think this move plus followup jump at o1 or n1 is bigger than white's s17. Is that correct?  MR: Sorry, I am not an endgame expert ...
...and same about this one. If white tenukis, black can go to l2 and and even kill white. White should never have allowed this to happen...  MR: White can connect to the center. White should not allow you to play all these endgames in sente!
MR: ? Why not S17?
MR: Game over. I guess you made about 10-15 points within the last couple of endgame moves. Now black will win the game.
I think this is quite small when compared with black's j19?  This is my last comment. I think I won this game, because white had a very bad yose and I got to very big points first. With that being the case, I think at first I was quite behind because of my unsuccessful attack. Is my analysis correct?
honibo [6k]: hi, good game
hanamizuki [6k]: hi
i dont like this move somehow :/ This move should be fine though, nothing wrong with it
This isnt usual
now w group  hasnt secured a base 100% yet and  wont get any points
attempting to attack  k17 group  looks like a good choise
not a good move for a number of reasons  there is a cutting point at A  and  the group  of  J14 -J13 becomes heavy  so near the black wall
to slow  and doesnt threaten much better play elsewere
this  looks  ok but maybe  3ed line is better to make it harder for black establish a base
to aggressive?   you need to be aggresive now but  it is a risky move non the less
i think i had to concern about o18 group now ....   indeed
need to protect  o18 now
not neccessary?
... had to sacrifece o15, but i got lucky
not enough nop
i noticed here...
play q6 in sente is the key here so you wont have shortage of freedoms and it ends in a double ko  black cant win
lucky he played such a small threat..
Which is bigger, this white move, or A or B ?  I don't really know, but it's worth studying.  One thing that comes to mind is that if white plays A and black answers at B, then white can still play the circled stone.
Now if white plays A, black can answer with a block, which he couldn't do if white played A right away.
What if black cuts right away ?  It looks promising.
If black is going to take gote, which is bigger , the played stone or A ?
i think it was a mistake to invade the strong black surroundings.  This move looks ok to me since white is strong on the left.  The time to avoid this kind of move is in situations where when black runs to the center white is split into two weak groups.  But that is not the case here since white has a strong group on the left.  For black's point of view, he probably should have made a stablizing extension here as soon as white played the 2-2 point.
this exchange of A and B seems to give white profit without giving black much.   Also, what about white C instead of B ?  If black blocks at F, white can atari at D and if black answers, white can make lots of profit with E.
Instead of A and B on left, how about if black had played C ?
This cut isn't as powerful now as before, since which has already played A so white can make a viable position here, and not worry about the single cut off stone.  Before, white would have been split into two groups.
black has 3 liberties.  I'm wondering, if black plays A instead, he has more liberties and will be attacking white more severely.
Which is better, the played stone or A ?
What about A instead of this move ?  GIves black profit and attacks white simultaneously.
already one of my pieces are in danger..
After blacks played stone, white still has to jump out such as to A, so how about playing A immediately, before B since it attacks black's middle stones.  Of course, white C is so huge too, since it both attacks black's corner and helps white's stones.
A still seems bigger than this black move.
White is using up liberties without gaining anything.
INstead of using up liberties how about playing this move immediately ?
If the liberty weren't used up, white could answer this attack more effectively.
too bad white ended in gote here.  that costs points
is this sente or is white already alive ?
Wfich works better, this atari or atari at A, assuming white will play B next anyway ?
Maybe A is better for preventing what happened later in the game.
Maybe A instead for white avoids being cut.
How does A work out for black instead of the circled stone ?
Which is better, A or the circled stone ? (by the way, when I ask these questions, I don't always have an answer !  It requires some reading.)
If black plays A instead of where he played, and white captures and black ataris at B, what is the status of the white group ?
im at a pretty big disadvantage because of that careless move..  This black move looks small.  Sure, black wants to strengthen the middle group.  But this doesn't attack much.    If white answers at A for example, black doesn't get much.    Maybe B instead, which strengthens black and prepares to attack the white stones on the right.    Or maybe C  is even better because it makes profit for black and also starts to attack the white stones.
I still like A better. If A and the played move both make profit for black, A looks better because besides making profit, it attacks white.  Notice if white plays A white is almost completely alive and black corner getting smaller.
Is black A better than the played move ?
If the played move doesn't make 2 eyes, is A better for black ?  Not sure, it's worth studying.
Again, if the played move only makes one eye, is A better for black ?
How about cutting at A instead of the played move ?  Not sure though...
managed to kill the corner to gain back a bit of what i lost.
i think this was the losing move..
Instead of this move, what if black plays A ?  Then, if white plays where black just played, black can make a seki.  If white answers black A and black next plays B, then what happens ?
instead of this move, what about black A ?
Instead of this black, how about A?      Is white definitely alive that way ?
If black is willing to take gote here, how about first playing A for extra points ?
If black is willing to take gote, then instead of this move, how about  A ?  Which is better ?  Is A really gote ?  After which ataris the 3 stones and black connects , if white does nothing more in the corner, can black do anything ?   Would B lead to a seki or a ko ?
If black wins this ko, he can't fill, nor can he atari white on the next move.  So maybe black shouldn't fight this ko yet.
Does this give away a point ?
too passive for W?                                                                                                      j: This is fine
maybe k3 or even c10 for W?                                                                                    J: I'd have approached from the other side. White 8 invites a pincer which would work well with black's other stones
c13 for W?                                                                                                                   J: Absolutely not. White must support his last stone , as you did
j: White 10 might equally have moved into the corner with D2.                                                                                               Note that at the end of the game Black has all 4 corners, and didn't really have to contest then at all.  You tend not to move into the corners - at least not in this game. If you're going to let the corneres go you have to make a lot out of the centre - see later comments
J: Black clearly prefers to grab corners early.
J: I'm not sure what you're after with white 14.  Is the plan to retain the corner or to build outside influence? Either way I think there were better alternatives.
W - maybe solidify top with g17?                                                                                J: G17 would be too timid I16 perhaps, but it lets black cut and there's three stones adrift, see the alternatives
J: OK at this point white has outside influence and black is looking to erase it.                                                                                                                                  So what is the purpose of influence? it is not to make (small) territory. The idea is to attack by driving the opponent's stones towards your position of strength. Making territory as you do.
W - k17?                                                                                                                       J: H17 is bad, small terrritory made while using a lot of stones.  K17 is better, although I don't like an attaching move as an attack - contact moves are for defense, attack should be more remote.
J; It feels like white played these last moves to keep his group alive.  It was alive anyway. No point letting black get stronger with the last couple of moves if you intended to leave things and play on this side.
W - r10 better first?
J; At this point white D2 seems instinctive. It establisheds the group, moves into the corner and since black will probably play C3 will be sente.
W -  too slow?                                                                                                              J: I've no idea of the purpose of this move.
W - e12 better?
W - L16?
J; Black looks like he will live. therefore I'd play M17 to tak esome territory and remove the potion of black forming abase on the top. Let him run to safety on the side - he gets no points you get many points in the process.
W - was trying to cutoff territory around o13                                                                                                                               J: The corner was bigger.
W - slow it seems
J; White 76 does not seem that important D2 or C3 seem bigger.
J: I don't think you can afford this
J:This misses a big opportunity
J: this is huge compared to lots of white's previous moves.  Territory is made on the edge so messing about in the middle doesn't usually become that important until the edges are finished.
gotonbo [2k]: hi
laurents [2k]: here, i wanted to complete a shimari since the extension at Q10 was already there. laurents [2k]: P17 looked kinda sente, since if White let me play J17, his position would be very thin. laurents [2k]: and so, he did respond
[Frank] I think either is ok.  laurents [2k]: i thought about F17, but then thought it was too slow. so I decided on K3. I hesitated between k3 and D10/D11. I didn't do that becuase i was afraid of a White san rei sei
[Frank] I do not like E3 here.  It removes some of the corner aji you might have and C6 kakari becomes less effective.  When you played K3, you should have been ready for a response like M3-E2.  If you do not like E2, perhaps you should play G3.  laurents [2k]: Here, i must admit i didn't really know how to respond......in retrospect, i probably should have F2 so as not to strengthen W. laurents [2k]: what do you think? laurents [2k]: I also thought about sort of tenuki and play C6 or even C3!
[Frank] You are absolutely correct.  This move shows your indecision.  That said, in this situation, you can switch over and emphasize the left side instead of trying to make magic with two groups.  laurents [2k]: in the end, i play this sequence which shows i haven't really made a clear choice. Better to do C6 without E3? laurents [2k]: and here, instead of C6, maybe i should have F2 first. laurents [2k]: Your thoughts?
[Frank] W is very generous...  He needs to split B here.  Any splitting move is ok I think.
[Frank] Seems there is bigger in this fuseki for W.
[Frank] Seems like a pointless move
[Frank] Very small unless you believe you can kill
[Frank] Absolutely.  You should not have played B5 because he had F5.  It would have been better for you to take F5.  Remember the fundamentals of connecting yourself and disconnecting your opponent.  if you play F5, W is disconnected from the center and your groups are very strong.  laurents [2k]: should n't G5 be at F5?
[Frank] W helps you connect nicely.
[Frank] You should always look for a better move.  How about D9 instead?
laurents [2k]: Here, i felt very happy about the corner sequences (both South corners); should I be? laurents [2k]: I didn't know how to answer: C12/D12 to extend from from wall, or be more conservative and play F17? laurents [2k]: I was afraid of a double pincer, sth like this (see var)
laurents [2k]: and so i played F17.
[Frank] C13 is dangerous, but luckily W does not know joseki :)  laurents [2k]: C13  is a kinda pincer move (again, it shows i didn't really choose...) ; here i tought W would answer at C17;
[Frank] W was too generous here.  The idea with this shape here is that A and B are miai.  Both can form a base quickly and if your opponent takes away one, you can have the other.  In this situation, only A is available  laurents [2k]: so I treated C13 as kikashi and took  the sans san to get a base easily.
[Frank] Well, W still has A18, which is why that shape I mentioned earlier can be dangerous for B.  If the top is settled, I think the timing is ok... Separating the bottom is probably the largest point on the board right now.  laurents [2k]: I felt after the game I had not been patient enough for this move.
[Frank] Can W play away right now?  What of O2?
[Frank] W leads by around 20 in territory, so it comes down to what you can make with that wall.  That said, W should focus on minimizing what might be middle territory as much as possible.  laurents [2k]: at this point, I felt very confident in the game. I thought I was leading by a lot (even though White has more territory so far).
[Frank] I think this is fine.  laurents [2k]: I thought about G15 instead of F18 after the game... any thoughts?
laurents [2k]: now, i would play K16; good idea or not?
laurents [2k]: K17 was plain stupid. laurents [2k]: i don't know why i played that:)
[Frank] To answer your original question, I would say the main reason this game was so close was simply that you were impatient.  There were many times that you played moves simply because you did not want your opponent to develop at all.  (for example, C6 because you did not want your opponent to get a shimari, or F3 for the same reason)  laurents [2k]: and here, we reach the crux of the matter; (the end of it anyway): with all my thickness, I had no group to attck: so I made territory....  How should I have done?
laurents [2k]: the rest goes smoothly until move....175
laurents [2k]: did I make the right choice? laurents [2k]: after A11
Anton> This move serves only to claim some influence - which is a good goal. But it could serve two goals at once - to claim and to attack. As you can see, there is a symmetry between the bottom point (K3) and the top point (K17) with the only exception - below there is no white stone. If you played K17 (or L17, which you did later) - you would get some influence, but would also threaten the white stone at O17 - which would give you the initiative in the further fight.
Anton> White misses the chance to claim more of the upper side.
Anton> Well done, though white could have used their previous move to expand on this side instead - then it would be more difficult.
Anton> Here you seem to try to protect the territory on the right side - but there is no territory there yet (as you can see by the way this game developed). While doing this - you allow white to connect their two stones, and get a lot of the corner.  Response here should be more aggressive - Q17, to divide the white's stones, and attack both of them. Getting a corner should not be that easy for him.  Also, even if you wanted to protect the territory - S16 is too low for that (especially this early in the game), and leave a huge hole - and a very weak wall, that could easily be attacked and exploited by white.
Anton> Here white could use the weakness of black's wall, and play much more aggressively - at P16. This would tear black's position to pieces.
Anton> I would play H17 instead - both make a good base for the black stone at L17, and attack the white stone at F17.  G16 is too loose - it seems to be directed at central influence, but leaves too many holes for white to get through.
Anton> The idea is good - you need to separate the white stones (what you failed to do in the upper right corner). The execution is not good - E17 forms a bad shape with the other black stones, and thus allows the white stones to attack it - and connect.  A simple and strong move at D17 would be much better, reliably separating the two white stones.
Anton> If the goal here was to build a wall facing the lower side (which is a good goal) - it would be better to just play C16. D17 is  a) a bad shape (empty triangle),  b) a small move - it does threaten to separate white stones, but it doesn't - and only forces white to make an obvious response, stealing one point. One point is very little at this stage.  Though in this area I would prefer to play H18, so that this black group is better connected to the black stone at L17. Also, this time could be used to attack the white stone at R6, if you want to be more aggressive, or claim more influence - K10 is a good example.
Anton> This move seems to have no meaning. White could ignore and extend to C16, getting more and more territory in this corner.
Anton> This move it too small at this stage. Try looking for more important moves on the board - ones that would get you more influence (some simple examples are N15, K10) and / or attack the white groups (for example R5, R8).
Anton> This move is very slow and weak - it does not do much for black, and does not look scary for white.  If you wish to push white out of the corner - make an attachment at R5. If you wish to safely close the corner - descend to R4. If you want to try to enclose white in the corner, and get the outside influence - approach from R8. Note that each of these moves stops white from building a base in one direction - thus forcing him to build in the other, or jump out to the centre. The move at Q5 does not really stop white from choosing what he wants to do.
Anton> I like this move, it is very brave, and obviously takes initiative by scaring white into panic decisions.
Anton> Well done, aggressive cutting supports the bravery of the earlier move.
Anton> I think here there is no direct threat to the black group beneath the white wall, so this would be a good chance to strengthen the stone at Q10 a little - perhaps by playing around R12.  Be careful about spending your move to make your already strong groups stronger - a move that could be spent on helping the weak stones instead.
Anton> The white stone at Q7 was caught already, it would be better to expan your influence further along the lower side, by playing at O7 - this would also theaten to cut white at O9 later.
Anton> Because of the hole at R16, it would be safer to try and connect Q10 with the group at Q16, instead of cutting through. R12 still seems like a good move that.
Anton> Pushing through at O11 is a stronger move, which would cause white to react protectively.
Anton> When you see a possibility to cut - seriously consider it. In this case O11 would be a very good cut, forcing white to run away.
Anton> Connecting your stones is good, but in this case neither of the groups are in direct danger, so you could spend this move elsewhere - for example N9 is a good attacking point.  Though, it is still very good to keep your groups connected, so I can't say it is a bad move :)
Anton> Nice cut.
Anton> Up to this point this sequence is well played! Here it was not necessary to capture the white stone at N6 - you could continue along the bottom side by playing at L6, to prevent white from getting there at all - then the territory at the bottom side would become more and more solid.  Also note that this move forms and empty triangle (because of white stone at O7), so this weak shape could be used later to white's advantage.
Anton> White uses the chance to wrap around the black group.
Anton> M5 is not justified - it submits to white before white even did anything. In such cases try to stretch out, instead of overcrowding your stones. L5 is much better.
Anton> Very slow move by white.
Anton> This stone could be played earlier, with the same result - now you can see that M5 was a useless move. Try to use your stone's potential to the fullest (even and especially if you are going to lose them :)).  A better reaction to white's move at K5 is to prepare for white's invading the left part of the bottom side - by playing at F4 (then the future white invasion at H3 could be used to gain influence on the left side of the board), for example.
Anton> Another slow move by white. It may be that white relaxed after seeing some of your moves - if you see in your games that this is the case, then it is high time to become very aggressive and unpredictable, to turn the table around :)
Anton> Okay, you see no direct threat at the bottom anymore and decide to take initiative elsewhere. This is good thinking in general - you shouldn't always follow your opponent's moves, you need to decide where to play every time.  Though in this case I would rather play F4, to prepare for future fight in this area. Capturing the two white stones is not so urgent at the moment.  If you do need to capture them, though, check possibility of a move like K13 or K14 - it still captures the stones, but gets your stones in a better position, less crowded and reaching out further.
Anton> Good, you need to build influence towards the left side.
Anton> B5 is better, to prevent white from sliding under your stones, and to emphasize the left side.
Anton> White knows what he wants in this case - destroy black's influence.
Anton> Very small move - there is no risk of white jumping under your stones to the middle of the lower side - and the lower side is not so interesting because of the white stones at K5 reducing black's influence.  Better would be to stop white's invasion to the left side before it is too late - by playing at C7, for instance.
Anton> Very small for this stage of the game. Think about what would happen if you left this stone unprotected - white plays E2, you play F2, and white has to capture at D1 (otherwise E2 would be a wasted move and stone) - while you don't need to respond at all. If this happens it will cost you 4 points - but check out the board, and see if you can find moves with higher cost - C7 is still a good opportunity to stop the white stones. Another option is J10 (nice because of the strong black wall at G16).
Anton> It would be good to have a black stone here instead :)
Anton> This move does not seem to achieve anything - white can still connect easily and, while attacking this black stone (and the subsequent moves) gets even stronger.  Better to play simply and just stop white from getting further - around C9, for example.
Anton> White tries to reduce black's framework in the upper part of the left side - a logical reaction would be to protect it. You could play E12 for a passive protection, or J10 for active protection (threatening to surround the white stone at F10).
Anton> Too tight. C9 connects the black stones and slows white's invasion at the same time.
Anton> Hm, very slow for a stone that needs to invade.
Anton> One stone further would be stonger - G8, it both protects from the cut at E6, and invades what white seems to want to make his territory.
Anton> You gave up the cutting stones at G9 too easily - this is not a good idea, cutting stones are very valuable.
Anton> Think about playing a less crowded and a more "reaching out" move at H7.
Anton> This didn't need to happen.
Anton> ...but if it does happen - don't leave weak spots behind. Now white can move further down - G6 or H6. You could play G6 instead of capturing the white stone, and prevent white from moving down too easily.
Anton> There was no need to capture this stone yet - white needed to make at least one more move (at R4) before connecting. Best to attack the lone white stone at Q2 - while it is still very weak.
Anton> Very small - if you don't play O4, white could play it, and only get one additional point.  You could regain control of the corner instead - black Q2, white forced O1, black R2 - white's two stones have less liberties than black's, and have no way to outrun black.
Anton> Too small. Having lost this corner, check the other areas of the board, to see if you could gain more by taking initiative elsewhere.  Examples - E12, H18, H4.
Anton> Sorry, but this is a useless move. This area of the board can be left as is for a while, but even here M3 is better - it gets additional territory, while N4 takes at least one point of your territory away.
Anton> If you plan to separate and capture the white stone (which you should be able to) better play at C9, to get more territory in the process.
Anton> B9 would separate the white stones more reliably instead of sacrificing a stone at B11 (which gives white a free eye).
Anton> You need to separate the white groups - B9 is the only move for this now.
Anton> Playing atari every time that you get a chance is not a good habit - try to stop yourself in such cases and think carefully about what you achieve and what you lose.  In this case you only make white stronger, and build an unreliable wall (a cutting point at D12) yourself.
Anton> A one point move - too small.
Anton> C13 would achieve more by keeping white stones on the second line.
Anton> There is little to be gained for black by playing in this crowded area, but there are still good moves elsewhere - for example H18, H4 or R13.
Anton> No need to build an outside wall in this case (because of presence of white stones around J13, breaking any black influence), consider L18 and then N18 instead.
Anton> An unnecessary move by white.
Anton> The connection was already reliable, no need to spend another move here. You could play K14 instead, to preserve the territory that you have here.
Anton> In such cases D14 stops your opponent better (with some exceptions when this would produce weak connection - but not in this case).
Anton> B14 would be more efficient in stopping white.
Anton> This is what we discussed earlier - leaving weak shapes allows your opponent to exploit them and gain advantage later.
Anton> This move was not needed, white is not threatening to cut. You could play H3 instead, to protect your territory.
Anton> A half-point move - if white decided to push through at D14, you would respond at D15, and white would have to protect their stones - thus giving you the initiative. Such points are best left until the very end.
Anton> Still too small (though soon this would be a good move) - check R13 or H3 instead.
Anton> Unnecessary move.
Anton> Unnecessary move.
Anton> You could play L14 instead, punish white for being too risky.
Anton> K14 would separate white stones. K13 has no meaning - does not gain you anything, and does not hurt white in any way.
Anton> Unnecessary move.
Anton> Consider playing B14 first (threaten to separate), and only then C15 (threaten to capture) - and gain the initiative.
Anton> N15 gains you more.
Anton> Closing such half-point kos should be left till the end. You could jump under the white stones (to S2, for example) instead.
Anton> Unnecessary move.
Anton> Unnecessary move (check A18, C1, T4, R19 instead).
Anton> Unnecessary move - white can play D1 and steal the point. C1 is better as it reduces white territory.
Anton> Unnecessary move.
Anton> Unnecessary move.
Anton> White also makes some unnecessary moves :)
Anton> Also not needed. Best to close the ko at M16 and end the game.
[Malweth]: Although this move is used in pro games, I'm not a fan of it because it gives Once she approaches, black gets too good a direction in the opening.
[Malweth]: This is the wrong direction. White should play at C6 to open up the Black moyo. It also forces Black to defend on the lower side, which will concentrate his stones in one section of the board.  Playing F17 too early might mean that you will be unable to play C14 as a follow-up to C6.
[Malweth]: Variations at this node discuss common joseki where B plays R17 next.   These variations are not in context with the whole board!
[Malweth]: If you don't know joseki, you should play what you can and learn the joseki after the game...  From a whole board scenario, this pincer shows why F17 was incorrect:  Q12 doesn't work well with the completed lower right (development is uninteresting from a low stone)  Q12 around O16 has the same problem with J17.  Therefore the choice in the upper left wasn't optimal. ---  I don't know anything about this joseki. If this were a serious game, I might have done something simpler, but I felt it was worth trying. I think black''s R17 is joseki, after that I'm not sure where/when it all breaks down.
[Malweth]: This move is quite common. The first thought should always be to hane.
[Malweth]: This is generally bad. You're bumping Black, forcing her into good shape (hitting on the head of 2 stones).
[Malweth]: So far you're doing well here...
[Malweth]: The continuation is always to play S17!!! It's sente and not aji keshi because the two white stones have no other life left in them.
[Malweth]: This is too small... play C6 now!
[Malweth]: I can't think of any reason why Black would play this.  It's obvious that the important stone is R10. Jumping out to P10 makes the most sense... Q14 can flee easily and is alive when B plays S18.  The R10 move was odd in the first place... Black is trying to make small territory on the side when moves like C9 are open!
[Malweth]: Black got herself into the position of needing to run... but even so, the stones are totally alive, so playing elsewhere would be best!
S10 instead looks good too. Otherwise B is left with the aji of S10.
[Malweth]: B should start with S10 if she wants to do something here.  She shouldn't want to do something here with BIG MOVES on the board!!
[Malweth]: White is looking overconcentrated... but you can't complain since Black gave it to you and gained nothing.
[Malweth]: Finally.
[Malweth]: I like C9 better. It takes the potential Black territory and keeps a center outlook.
[Malweth]: Black is ignoring the situation. E7 is correct joseki to attack F3.
[Malweth]: You could think of F5 maybe, or play E7 yourself.
[Malweth]: This move is odd.
[Malweth]: I like J4 better! This looks like it's aiming for territory. J4 works better with F3.
[Malweth]: This is pretty big, but it's hard to play it knowing what happens next.
[Malweth]: Black has a lot of power on the left half of the board now!!
[Malweth]: This move makes no sense (you're not attacking anything). Black has a lot of power building up on the left... you need a way to negate it!
[Malweth]: Black is saving small stones! See variation off J13.
[Malweth]: This is too close to the thickness.
This is too greedy for white. I should lt M4 go and make sure N7 lives. If I do, the game should be easy for white.  [Malweth]: It is fairly small.
[Malweth]: This move does not make sense. You are weakening N7 further... and this side group is alive.
We both miss the atari here. Overall, I felt happy with how close the game has been and once I noticed I brought it to her attention and let her fill. The game was too good to end with a mistake like this.
This is when we see it. I made the slack move here intentionally.
KKMD: Up to this point I find your fuseki quite good. I like D16 in particular, emphasizing the bad relationship between white's san-san and its stones on the 4th line.
KKMD: The joseki is A, but white probably disliked the idea that you could answer B. Well, the upper side is more valuable at the moment.
KKMD: I don't know what is the best move in this situation, but I feel yours is too nice. Since white insists on the upper side, I'd want to ask him once again with a move like A if he will continue responding there. Plus, you coud afterwards aim at B.
KKMD: Nice shape, but white had it to easy on the upper side. He must be very happy to have played the marked move in sente.
KKMD: Come on! You're strong enough to attack with A, and you should definitely do that. Again, you're being too nice.
KKMD: The standard move is A, after which white has much less problems.
KKMD: Good, at least in spirit. Attack the weak group while building strong positions.
KKMD: Baaah. This is weak, you expose yourself to all kinds of nasty stuff. White will probably be able to exploit the weaknesses around A. Instead of your move, B, in the same spirit, is better; C also comes to mind as a possible improvement. I think they're not the strongest move in this situation, though, but I don't know exactly what to suggest; maybe D?
KKMD: I understand your wish to reduce the zone of influence of white in the lower left. Since this also strengthen your group and reinforces your central influence, it's certainly not a bad move. However, there are other hot spots on the board. White's group in the lower right is still not settled, but it's not clear how to profit from attacking it. You could start playing at A and see what happen; if white pulls its stone out, you can perform a split attack.
KKMD: This time I don't agree. There are more urgent moves, and the marked stone is in no real danger.
KKMD: Very crude.
KKMD: Letting white connect here is no big deal. It would be way better letting him save the marked stone, while eating his three-stone group. Of course the same commentary applies to your two next moves.
KKMD: I didn't comment too much the last moves, since you said you were mainly interested in the fuseki. I agree that, to this point, your in advance, although not by so much, considering the komi.
KKMD: If you're afraid of the tricks white might be able to pull up, you still have A up your sling.
KKMD: I think white cannot live after A. Then again, I'm no tsumego-wizard, so I might be wrong. I give a variation to support my claim.
KKMD: Why not A?
KKMD: Aaargh. This is just a monkey jump, stop it like a monkey jump (see variation).
KKMD: There has been some quite stupid play on both side. Time trouble?
Yannka [6k]: qorry miss click Chiodus [6k?]: it's ok
KKMD: Ununderstandable. Black can just answer A, but if white wants to lose a stone... of course black can play the ko while its risk-free.
KKMD: This isn't worth anything.
OK so far
First bad move by W.  The move doesn't server any purpose: It doesn't build a base, build territory, establish thickness, or eliminate the opponent's base. It's easily cut, and basically creates a seperate weak group.  Your group in the corner is safe already, so you can either attack the group by threatening it's base, or tenuki and play elsewhere.
Now the mistake earlier cost you
Very weak connection - Easily cut in both directions.  I'd strengthen the corner instead, then play elsewhere.
Ouch #1.
Pointless move - Easily cut.  Your groups aren't in a position to attack Black's right now. You have a major cutting point in the lower right, AND a major cutting point at the top. You need to fix your positions before you can attack.  Also, to attack do not attach - You attack by threatening to take away Black's base. The 2 variations illustrate how this would look - ONLY a good move if your group is strong, which it's not.
You now have two weak groups. Black has very strong influence towards center.
The 2 variations shown are strong ways to connect the groups.
Too weak to create cutting points. Very dangerous, will cost you later.
Wasted move. Stones on the bottom are dead.
Wasted move - Corner is already alive.
Again, connect. Empty triangle is very bad shape. You have 4 stones with only 3 liberties.
Connect is essential here.
Read ahead before you move - This move is completely wasted.
All these cutting points (Triangle) make this group EXTREMELY weak.  The Xed group is also very bad shape.  One big area to improve your game in would be to play in straight lines, and much, much less "curves" (cutting points.)
No! Unless you have a very good reason, attaching to an enemy stone is generally a bad idea. It only causes him to strengthen, and you have a lone stone in enemy territory.  You also have an unfinished corner. Instead of trying to invade B's relatively strong area, strengthen your area instead.
You just gave B the whole corner & side.
Again, read ahead - It's a ladder.
Empty triangle - Bad shape.
Same move - Bad move.
Cutting points.
Again, you now have 3 weak groups all split up.
Again, read ahead - Ladder.
Group is probably dead ...
W should resign - Black is winning by far.
If you can connect this group, now is the essential time to do it.
All in all, the major points to work on are:  1) Recognize and avoid cutting points. Generally, any time you "curve" you create a cutting point. Try to play in straight lines.  2) Avoid having your groups split into multiple weak groups. Pay attention to having a good base for every group, especially before attacking.  3) Learn some shapes - Avoid bad shapes, strive to create good shapes.  All the best,  - Derek  DerekPankaew@gmail.com
i don't know if my left group is safe enough to leave like that but i felt like i should attack the 3 white in the middle.  crazyd - seems okay, the D2 group should survive.  Perhaps a higher move like K4 would be both more forceful for attack and more consistent with the idea of growing a moyo based on your 4-4 corners.
crazyd - L4 is a narrow door.  You might want to play there before the door is shut by your opponent.
which is more important? - playing free spaces - connect n4. it looks like a fine wall to me  crazyd - I don't think it is a fine wall for two reasons.  1) it does not enclose anything (the L2 stones are connected out to K5), and 2) it is white's turn and he can play around R10 and live easily in front of your wall.
crazyd - O16 looks better for you.  If he responds, then you have two facing walls and it is your turn to play in the middle.  If he doesn't respond, then your move is a good follow-up.
i am trying to push white to my strong(?) wall  crazyd - I think this is the right direction.
crazyd - R5 seems much better to me.  This gives your opponent a useful cut.
is sacrificing r6 good here?  crazyd - see previous comment.
while playing i realized that playing p7 was much better than q7. your idea?  crazyd - They say to play corner moves before side moves and side moves before center, so R3 or R4 are better for points.
at this point i lose my calm, and try to invade the big white areas. when should i have moved on the left and upper side?  crazyd - I agree white seems better, but not because you haven't invaded yet.  As for white, there are weaknesses around C13-C14 and the area between D16 and K16.   When combined with invasion probes like C17 or D18 you should have an easy time reducing white's area.
crazyd - How about leaning attack at M13, threatening the three white stones to the right.  If he defends, then try J15.  His move 66 starts the same idea against you.  Are you keeping in mind that he can still invade at R17?
i think, those stones cannot live against a strong player but i try. is it bad?  crazyd - I liked the way you played in the upper right corner.  For these two stones, see what you think about my variation on your next move.
crazyd - good ko threat.
isn't this a big ko threat? he doesn't answer  crazyd - it's only a big ko threat if it kills the K4 group, right?  White has N2 and the center as miai, so I would not be confident I could kill it.
crazyd - K7 is better, and his nobi next move was very bad.
crazyd - see variation for white's next move.
can you see a way to make two eyes for the white stones at bottom middle?  crazyd - see variation for H7
i think l8 and p14 stones are weak and i can capture them. your idea?  crazyd - I think you are right, but you take the small group and let the big one escape.  Why not take the big group with a move like Q11 instead of your move at L9?
wrong move? i think he must play q9.  crazyd - White 170 is too small.
could they live there before this move?  crazyd - see variation for move 175
stupid move
crazyd - the move you took back is better than the one you played.
folmez [7k]: thanks
Egor [7k]: np
disgusting attemp but i try to kill p15 group. seeking for a misread by white.
there is no way to live there for white, right?
FM: This move forces white to strenghten his marked stone. If you wanted to start a fight here, A and B are quite possible, though black would better protect his lower right stone first
FM: this move is slow, making it easy for white to tenuki and capture the corner
FM: this move is afraid of the sansan invasion, but is a bit too slow
Clever [1d]: Lol, did not work out the way I thought.
fuzzyStone [2d]: the corner is too big   FM: natural splitting. Maybye playing on the fourth line would be a bit better to make it easier to go to the centre
FM: also natural move.
FM: this makes the marked stone standing a bit strange and white is instantly aiming at the A point
FM: strange move. As the lower left corner is dead, this stone has only minimal attacking power even if black gets the A sente move and can be easily pincered. This move should absolutely be tenukied by white, for example by playing at B.
FM: This makes the marked exchange good kikashi for black
FM: interesting move. Black is afraid of white getting both A and B, which would hurt his shape, but also strenghtens white a lot.
FM: black missed an interesting fighting chance
FM: natural answer
FM: when playing in this area, A is better, hurting the white shape and making some cutting aji. Being thicker is more important than getting one eye.
FM: although white could capture the stone in sente, which would be big, black has more important things to do now.
FM: peaceful way of solving this conflict. With the marked stone, I would play A, especially when being behind, it's usually better to build some power and fight
FM: this move and the following sequence is weird. Sometimes happens on internet I guess
FM: not important now
FM: ...
FM: white last seven moves were 12k moves. Probably a matter of psychology, when the winning player, after a successful beginning, tries to end the game too quickly and underestimates his opponent, resulting in getting such a terrible outcome as in this area.
FM: ...
FM: interesting move, looks good. If black captures the stone, he is alive
FM: good
FM: this move helps black
FM: black gets an optional life in the A-B-C combination and gets our of the fight quite well
FM: A was the proper invasion I think. After A, black can easily make good shape by playing B and C in sente, while destroying the eye space of the two white stones
FM: white is building his wall in a wrong direction
FM: white is missing a big opportunity
FM: black gets a fantastic position out of playing sansan into the area where white already had four stones around. White is losing points again
FM: this is not the position for this technique
FM: the A-B-C aji is too painful for white. The marked exchange was bad for white
FM: white is happy to protect his weakness while forcing black to defend his stone
FM: fighting spirit
FM: discutable. Better to play A directly. By playing atari like this, black forces white to play B, which protects the big endgame point of C. Also, if after black A white continues attacking, black can play B himself when he gets a chance
FM: white magics out some fighting
FM: black did not need to answer this move, A and B are miai
FM :) really lucky
FM: A,B, C(white) and D are the areas of absolute endgame importance now.
FM: megahuge
FM: this move is too optimistic
FM: big loss
FM: black got all the four most important endgame moves. The game is over now.  It was won by psychology, luck and nice trying - after what happened on the bottom, white started playing quite careless and lost every fight after black splitted his groups on the right side. You erased his lead little by little everywhere, making no really big mistakes after losing the lower left corner. The most painful black mistakes were the few too quickly played stones like those I have markered, which could be much improved quite easily just by looking a bit more detailed on the position. Except of those, I think it was a nice game from your side.   Wish you many enjoyed games and I hope you liked my comments.  Martin    ~~~(_,_,_*>
A: Black is slow here. The usual idea is to play at one of the marked points, giving you an enclosure. Even the enclosure at this point I would not be happy with, since white could next take the corner the enclosure was facing.  Another way to think about it: say you already had played the 4-4 point, would the 3-3 be the way you'd develop it? Either way, you are being slow.
A: Black has secured maybe 40 points, and has a strong wall, but you have:  1) An enclosure in one corner, mitigating that face of his wall 2) Two other corners with your flag in them 3) A nice framework on the right side.  Maybe with P10 I would have played on the left side to mitigate that facing of his/her wall, but I think your opening so far was a very strong response to a series of moves you'd probably not thought about before.
A: This might be too close for comfort to Black's wall. Looking at variations, I came up with no definitive proof of this. But it feels like Black is SO strong here, that s/he should be able to abuse you. Not sure though.
A: I'd go back and do something with C10 and D11 at this point, they are flush against a black wall at the moment.
A: When your opponent gives you a shape that is already half cut, you very often want to take it (see variation)
This courner fight starting here ends badly on my part. What do you think would be the best approach?
A: Staying connected is worth more than sealing off the corner. As far as the coming fight is concerned, once you read a situation out and decide you have to lose something, commit to it. Use moves that force your opponent to capture to get stones in places that benefit you, and move on. (see comment later on)
A: Hurts your outside shape, and gives Black more to gobble.
A: Good. The fight went badly, but this connects your stones together and cuts your losses. (See variation, though)
A: Not needed. I'd protect against R17 at this point, or maybe do something more active since you are behind.
If you get attached to like this, I'd say the general advice would be to either hane at A or extend.  This will be my last large comment. I think that this was a good game but you got the short end of the stick in the middlegame fighting. My advice (take with several grains of salt):  1) Practice fighting. Maybe invade someday where you were doing to reduce, or cut where you were going to just push/connect. Have fun with it :). 2) Focus on connections: Cut where you are relatively strong, connect when you are relatively weak.   Was the time limit on this game really 10 minutes sudden death? Fast play is fun, but if you want to play to get better, you need to leave yourself time to concider moves beyond the "gut feeling" moves you make in a fast game. I'm not saying you SHOULD be playing for improvement, because you should play the go that is fun for you. If your goal is advancement, though, give yourself some more time.  To respond to your final question, yes, you were behind by a significant margin without many prospects of big fights or other things to turn your way.
HarryH has run out of time.  Black ran out of time, but if he didn't I should have resigned, right?
I felt that here i should have maybe been able to take an advantage from his deviation from joseki.
I tend to suffer in the opening, is this the biggest point?  I would prefer to make shimari(C14) to make sure black can not use his wall very well but this isn't bad as well. About not finishing joseki, see variation.
This seems to give away to much, black was very weak in this area and this way you just give him all points for not really nice wall.  I would prefer to play O17 insteed.
This situation in the top right didn't end well for me. maybe i should have just gone for a solid wall?
Now looks bit complicated but black looks ok.
I am not sure about this move, R13 might be better.
This is probably wrong side for black to block, white isn't that bad now.
I think this move really let me down, I was afraid that if i went for a territory grabbing move black framework on the right would have become massive.  I don't think so, it should be easy to reduce the side especially with bit weakness at Q14, which  you could use even now.
I like this exchange for black.
Cut looks like good idea.
But this is bad for sure, after black gets L14 is is very hard to attack him
This only helps black.
White did not gain enough points in this area in compare to what he lost at the right side.
Should be R9 to capture black.
White allowed connection so his position on the board is bad now.
Very lucky for you, if black choose to start with M18 insteed of H18 game would be over already.
White survived everywhere and got black K18 stones, so definetly you got same points back after this.
This is quite good idea, capturing this group,although it may be hard would allow white to get a lot of points. Black could have probably won the game by simply extending in L3 area insteed.
What is the point of playing this one? It just creates aji, K9 look much better.
I missed the connection here.  Yea, this hurt a lot, G5 was the only move.
Now last chanse is to capture M15 stones.
Now black has left hi group at the top, it might be good idea to try and kill it.
This is strange, why not P19 to remove the eye?
here i finally saw that black could make an eye :(  Yea, you lost move at L18, you should have removed that eye insteed. After that the game was over.  Concluding you played fighting game but quite fast got behind. There were atleast 2 quite easy mystakes in reading which If avoided can allow you to win games(Q9 and L18). You should also avoid giving away easy points to opponent. Like you did at D14.
blas [4k]: hi
this is not good. as seen before, black should do the exchange at the right if he wants to kakari here.
blas [4k]: Till now I think I've played ok. Even I think Im winning
blas [4k]: I think its good to meke a base here and to be safe
blas [4k]: this I think is very bad   Yes this is not good for black
blas [4k]: not necesary  and now there are important moves
this is a good move.  if not white will take your corner.
blas [4k]: to let him make k16 and d10 have made me lose  the 2 stones has not gained much as there are spaces for invasion. All these are places for you to sabaki or invade.
bad move.
blas [4k]: too far
blas [4k]: better to save m15 before fichting here   not good... even if you want, it should be at h17
blas [4k]: he have make a mistake here
blas [4k]: This move is very good
blas [4k]: I put the upper group in problems, but if I dont close here, I loose for sure
blas [4k]: Too agresive, but Im loosing
blas [4k]: very good blas [4k]: now im lost
All moves from here on are calculations which can only be improved by doing more tsumego and L&D.  Will not have anymore comments behind but there are some variations for you to try.  The improtant parts of this game is actually in front, at moves 8, 12 and 24.   Hope this review helps you in improving.  Good luck and all the best.
blas [4k]: thx molego [3k]: thx
TsuQ: This is the only side where both stones are on the "fourth line" relative to the side of the board. So the left side should be played first here because there is more territory to be won and lost.
B: W didn't work near the right up corner stone, somehow exposed by K16. Should now go to a kakari approach? From which direction?  TsuQ: The usual direction to approach, is the same direction white would enclose.
B: is bottom larger move?  TsuQ: I think my preference would be for the enclosure on the top. Its a bit smaller than the enclosure on the bottom (because the white enclosure is closer to the potential territory on top) but it would place you under the white stones on the left. Usually the 3-4 is played with the idea of making corner enclosures shortly thereafter.  You have agreed on a fighting game by playing diagonal corners, so the amount of total territory available will be less than normal and the corners should be more valuable.  Also considering the relationship between the two stones marked. Playing like this suggests that black is willing to take less territory than white in the same area of the board... It may be better to settle for a similar amount of territory elsewhere, such as on the bottom.
B: maybe on line lower?  TsuQ: One line lower seems better, in this position your stones are pretty much separated already. A space lower and you should have a connection available.
B: should B give up the 2 stones for the moment and go to a second pincer?  TsuQ: I don't think black can afford to play away from these two stones. They are cutting the two white groups, or are at least trying to, without these stones there is no attack on the white stones on either side.
W: can W prevent for sure a cut and isolate the 2 B stones?  TsuQ: I don't believe so. Cutting on the other side may be slightly better, but should have a similar result.
TsuQ:  killing isnt always best - see variation
B: suddenly the W is cut and seems B won the fight. Isn't the price to high? I am referring to the fact that W designs a large moyo in left bottom quarter and maintains a presence in right up.  TsuQ: Although this leaves more weaknesses in the white position as marked, the cost in the upper right is extensive.
W: should instead connect?  TsuQ: No this is absolutely correct. This strength will work very well with the corner enclosure. If you connect you will probably die, or at least have the value of your enclosure reduced.
TsuQ: After this it's clear killing in this way was a bad choice.
TsuQ: I'm not sure about this approach, but its difficult to say where is best. I put some options in the variations.
B: try to play for 2 directions: either corner or bottom side.  TsuQ: Be aware where the escape route is as well. you are deep in now, but you can also treat your stones lightly and escape through your opponents territory.
TsuQ: When things look difficult for your stones, consider treating them lightly.
B: decide the corner, hoping that anyway on the side will be maybe space for life  TsuQ: Ok, this move is difficult because white has defended the corner to some extent in one move. you can't threaten the left side easily because it has a strong shape and access to the center, so this has to be a threat on the corner, or it doesn't work.
TsuQ: Living small in the corner doesn't help reduce the moyo...
TsuQ:  Again, killing isn't always best, even when possible. Consider the variation.
B: give up the side for good  TsuQ: Be aware in this position that the corner is weak, there is roughly half an eye there.
B: in order to gain some extra threats while establishing the corner and left side.  TsuQ: Usually any threat you get from playing out the ladder exists anyway if you play it directly. A4 seems appropriate instead. White isn't completely secure on the bottom yet, but the more stones he plays there the harder it will be to try to come in later.
TsuQ: You can only play this with an eye on the outside... See the variation for an alternitive
B&W: the moyo in center becomes reality. When is / was the moment to invade / reduce it? Is it important, or B should ignore it? Is the corner fight actually forcing W make such large noyo?  TsuQ: The corner fight gave white extra strength towards these two stones. The timing of the invasion was correct, but the method was wrong. Living small in the corner gives white strength on both sides. Also a play around square is very big for both sides right now since it's the life or death of the black group in the corner/side.  Ordered goals of an invasion: Connecting out Escape to the center Living
B: felt the group unsecure.  TsuQ: It was, this is needed.
B: should give up corner for the center?  TsuQ: On basic principal no. Corner > Side > Center. Perhaps black should have enclosed this corner earlier...
B: Was g17 too soon, allowing W make life on the side?  TsuQ: I don't think so, this gives black a nice top side and reduces white. otherwise white will play on the top first.
TsuQ: Good timing and location.
TsuQ:  not this way, it values the center over the side and the center is already quite busy. See variation.
B: is there a way to prevent link?  TsuQ: A few moves earlier perhaps, but not at this point. (see variation for move 107)
TsuQ: you need to get the value out of these stones. See variations.
TsuQ: this may be just a bit too deep
TsuQ: B should not be allowed to escape so easily here. this is costly.
B: felt behind, kamikaze attack  TsuQ:  You have another reduction attempt still open to you around k8.
B: dead
B: try to cut  TsuQ: B has to make more weaknesses in the white position before this can work. Also see the variation
B: steal a little
TsuQ: w has ways to try to fight this harder.
TsuQ:  defending this one stone seems small compared to the reduction about to happen to blacks upper side. Similarly w does not need this move since his stones are connected out, they are completely alive already.
W: steal a little  TsuQ: now the upper side has almost no points for black.
TsuQ: B can now live, but not like this. See varition.
TsuQ: This threatens to make a ko for life, black can't do much better here now... Normally these would be saved for ko threats, but there's no ko anywhere and the game is basically over.
Thank you. Any observations are welcome.  TsuQ: Here why is A3 marked? It's a full point if there's any confusion... B can't be forced to fill it because the black group in the corner has an eye there.  General Advice: Keep focus on the main objective, marking off territory and preventing your opponent from doing the same. Capturing stones and indeed keeping them alive isn't optimal if it leads to a bad territorial result.  The 3-4 point generally leads to a corner enclosure. There are other moves of course, but ithe enclosures are quite valuable. Try to find time to make them.  The corners and sides are generally more valuable than the center, so try to avoid placing stones above the 4th line until the corners are secure.  I hope it was helpful =]
Black: Please comment on my Fuseki
DB: How to respond to this?  Well, my teacher tells me that we should focus on principles to guide us.    One principle that black violated by playing at the marked position is where to play in the opening.   We think about corners first, then side, then centre.  To play along the side or the centre, the move should be along the 3rd (3 rows from any edge) or 4th (4 rows from any edge).  Anything higher, like the 5th line here, is only in the centre.  So black chose a slow move here.  A, B, C, and D are joseki.  A is most common I think.  And the simple joseki works nicely for black's Q3 stone I think.
DB: It looks like black wants to develop the bottom side, but there is nothing here, as white demonstrated.
DB: white can settle easily here  Now is a good time to introduce the three questions that my teacher advises us to follow:  1.  Do I have any weak groups?   If yes, then help the weakest group.  If no, then next question 2.  Does white have any weak groups?  If yes, then find the best way to pressure the weakest group. 3.  Find the biggest area.    Here, black has a weak group at A.  this group needs help.
VingTsun [12k?]: Maybe Artkid will review  DB: a big move, but I would rather settle the A group.  It is weak.  See variation for white.
DB: White approaches thickness.  This is the wrong direction.  Ok, for black:  1.  Do I have any weak groups?   Yes, E3 is weak, black should help it at A. I think B would be asking for trouble, since white will have the next move and is relatively settled.   Notice how different the game is if black plays to help Q3 before settling E3 first!
DB:  Good thinking.  Settle the weak black group.  Also, this makes white weaker, and white will need to fix this group.  Still, I would be a little worried about the weakness here.  I would rather hold back one at H3.    For white:   1.  Do I have any weak groups?    I think the A group needs help now, he should come out at O5 or L5.  I like L5 most, since it pressures the black group and aims at G3.
DB: this is a big move for white, but I'm not sure I would be willing to leave the bottom area yet.  For black:   1.  Do I have any weak groups?     Q16 has been approached, so black should respond to this.
DB: Ok, but playing on the 4th line at Q14 makes the statement that black wants to expand the right side. But the right side is awkward to build because the lower shimari is in the wrong direction. See variations here.
DB: ok, time for the 3 questions again:   1.  Do I have any weak groups?   Well... The upper shimari isn't finished yet, but it isn't weak either. The lower shimari is settled and strong. The lower left group is fairly settled, although the distance between E3 and J3 I find rather nagging... I would like to fix this.  How to fix?  Well, let's ask the questions again:  Do I have any (other) weak groups?  No.   Does white have a weak group?  Yes.  Aha!  Is there a move that I can use to help my weak group while harassing white's weak group?  I think you can see it...
Too soon.  Black's marked group needs help.
Still...the 3 questions:   1.  Do I have any weak groups?     Yes.  C15 is locally outnumbered 2 to 1.   Arguably the weakest group on the board. Most common joseki choices from here.  E is not joseki.
This is not joseki.  If this, then jump out one farther, to F15.  see variation.
DB:  Every move should be guided by 3 questions: 1.  Do I have any weak groups?   2.  Does white have any weak groups? 3.  Find the biggest areas  1.  Do I have any weak groups?  Yes.  The marked group has only 2 directions to grow/run: into the corner and into the centre.  A healthy group has 3 directions.  So this group needs help.  This is the most important thing to do on this board.    Possible ways that I can think to play are listed A through D. I think I like B most - settles black quickly.  This variation is shown already at move 17.
This move has no good relation with either side.  White can easily come in around R12 and the relationship with the black shimari is flat.  Better to have helped the A group. It is still weak.
white invades.  It is a little dangerous - only 2 ways to run (upper side and centre), but I think this is playable.  Ok, our three questions:  1.  Do I have any weak groups?   If yes, then help the weakest group.   The A group is still weak.  Help it!
Black: Questionable IMHO. Perhaps timid... not committed to fight yet. Contact kosumi @ 13 better?  Black is not ready to fight yet.  A is still weak.  The corner is open.  Locally, sealing the corner is bigger then touching this weak stone.  Contacting will help a weak stone, not attack it. Locally, defend around the marked area.
white invades the corner.  Excellent timing.  Although the biggest moves are attacking the A group.
too timid.  Still the biggest move is to help the A group.
Midnight [-]: Why no cutting Midnight [-]: WHY no cutting Black: Good question! The giant was still sleeping...
VingTsun [12k?]: tit for tat ;-) I've got to put my kids to bed... BRB (god willing) GoRival [9k]: hheh ok np  DB:  Good, this has been the most important move for about 10 moves now.
Midnight [-]: wow Midnight [-]: some fussy kids..... VingTsun [12k?]: I'm back! GoRival [9k]: kelwkewl GoRival [9k]: i gave ya some time:P GoRival [9k]: how have you been latley
VingTsun [12k?]: not bad VingTsun [12k?]: thanks for the time
GoRival [9k]: np GoRival [9k]: whats 5 minutes between friends right VingTsun [12k?]: hehehe...  DB: white isn't ready for this yet.
destroying the aji around C9.  Don't touch weak stones!  A is so big.
VingTsun [12k?]: ...5minutes of thinking for you and 5 minutes of distraction for me. Not a bad trade ;-) GoRival [9k]: hahaha....its a joseki hahah VingTsun [12k?]: I'm Joseki-ignorant if you remember GoRival [9k]: i can tell GoRival [9k]: i wanted you to follow  f them GoRival [9k]: to follow two of them GoRival [9k]: hahaha GoRival [9k]: didnt go that way VingTsun [12k?]: should I say 'sorry'? GoRival [9k]: hahaha GoRival [9k]: its all good VingTsun [12k?]: I know. GoRival [9k]: i forget..some people dont know these josekis yet GoRival [9k]: which is why chosing them is hard  DB:  the weak stone is now strong because of D12.
VingTsun [12k?]: Deviation can kill ya
GoRival [9k]: yeshu it can GoRival [9k]: :P  DB:  Side before center.  Black can just walk into the moyo with E9 or something similar. But black should fix at A.
Midnight [-]: I was kidding Midnight [-]: I was kidding Midnight [-]: :P  DB: Good!  This move is quite big I think.  But fix at A first. Also, I think J5 is enough and better shape.
This is a classic bad shape.
DB: ok, but A needs fixing first.
White: this was my set up for either reduction or life,  from what i read out  DB: looks pretty hopeless to me at this point.
DB: White gets what he wanted.
VingTsun [12k?]: Yeah... I mis-spent my youth GoRival [9k]: you blocked it...possibly getting the corner too  DB:The corner is already trampled on.  There is nothing in the corner except 2-4 points.
Black: Goofy move. Circled points would have been better, certainly.
DB: ok, time for the questions:  1.  Do I have any weak groups?    Black's groups all have a base and all have room to grow into the centre (the only remaining open area, since corners and sides are pretty much settled).  Ignoring the the marked point would be unsettling for me though.   I mean, black isn't about to die here, but I just wouldn't want to have to deal with white playing D16.   And black D16 And is sente, so probably fix here first.
small move.  If white wants to atari and capture this stone, let him.  There are better things to do.  The 3 questions will help you find those better things.
1.  Do I have any weak groups?     White D16 would hurt the upper black group, so...
A remains bigger.
bad.D16 bigger.
Black: Should have been D16!  DB: Black lets white "hane at the head of two" here.  The hane is already in place at G17.  It's like black let white hit him on the head!
Black: another opportunity for D16, or bamboo @ F15?  DB: fix at D16 then tenuki.
DB:  Ok time for the questions again.  1.  Do I have any weak groups?    Black looks pretty much settled.  2.  Does white have any weak groups?  If yes, then find the best way to pressure the weakest group.  The A group is weak, so this should be pressured.  I might be going on a limb here, but I like starting the attack by a shoulder hit at M11.
this move is 0.5 point.
VingTsun [12k?]: We'll come back to 69 VingTsun [12k?]: yes VingTsun [12k?]: ?  DB: Hard for me to comment on the variations here.  But I find them all small.  White has a weak group on the bottom and it should be pressured by black. I think I like starting with A.
Black: IMHO THIS is the game deciding move... It SHOULD have been L11 instead.  DB: So many mistakes in the fuseki prior to this move.  Hard to say if this board has a game deciding move.
GoRival [9k]: ok
VingTsun [12k?]: Back to 69!
DB:all too loose on both sides.
DB: 1.  Do I have any weak groups?    Black looks settled.  2.  Does white have any weak groups?    A is weak.  Attack A. Maybe it's ready to poke out the base.
DB:  F9 is nice - for 2 points.  Instead:    1.  Do I have any weak groups?   If yes, then help the weakest group.  If no, then next question 2.  Does white have any weak groups?  If yes, then find the best way to pressure the weakest group.  A remains weak.  Ok.  I'll stop reiterating these ideas.  I hope I have convinced you that they are very useful. Even if white A lives, pressuring it will bring profit in sente for black.  Who could ask for more?  Profit in sente?
DB: Drives white into your area.  Yuk.
DB: Drives white into your area.  Yuk.
DB: appalling for black having to submit like this.
GoRival [9k]: i extended bring the pian GoRival [9k]: *pain GoRival [9k]: haha oh this GoRival [9k]: haha  DB: Very dangerous.
GoRival [9k]: ahahha i hope i read this out right
Black: A8 might have been better. D4 was born of fear. Whether it was unfounded, I'm not sure.  DB: very founded.  black A8 is nothing.  But black D5 is better style.
GoRival [9k]: hahah
Black: This was a gutless move!
Black: aji-kaeshi. Should have been @ P16 where it would have been a real threat. Fog of War ;_(  DB:  P16 is bigger yes.
GoRival [9k]: didnt think abotu that GoRival [9k]: hahah VingTsun [12k?]: I was waitin' in the bushes VingTsun [12k?]: you had sente
GoRival [9k]: hhah yeah GoRival [9k]: my read on the libs GoRival [9k]: haha GoRival [9k]: bad GoRival [9k]: haha VingTsun [12k?]: If I had made a move in there first it would have died IMHO GoRival [9k]: yeah methinks so
VingTsun [12k?]: hehehe GoRival [9k]: fun tho:P VingTsun [12k?]: I had another kick at the can until you took that ;-) GoRival [9k]: hehe GoRival [9k]: still tho
GoRival [9k]: huge reduction GoRival [9k]: all because i made a worn move and extended GoRival [9k]: haha
GoRival [9k]: *wrong
VingTsun [12k?]: ? VingTsun [12k?]: You'll have to edify me GoRival [9k]: hahill show after what i mean GoRival [9k]: haha
VingTsun [12k?]: bring it on big man!
VingTsun [12k?]: ;-D GoRival [9k]: :P
DB: T16 is now huge sente for black.  Not that I noticed it until I saw Midnight's comment!
DB: this is gote.  Bad.
GoRival [9k]: haha crap VingTsun [12k?]: :-p
Midnight [-]: T16  DB:  Oop!  This has been around for a while and I missed it!  T16 is huge sente.
DB: 0 point move.
Midnight [-]: O13 GoRival [9k]: your scarinbg me GoRival [9k]: :P GoRival [9k]: *scaring GoRival [9k]: haha
VingTsun [12k?]: gifties! ;)_
GoRival [9k]: yeshu GoRival [9k]: jajaj
VingTsun [12k?]: that was silly VingTsun [12k?]: wasted move VingTsun [12k?]: getting tires VingTsun [12k?]: tired
GoRival [9k]: ya i can under stand
VingTsun [12k?]: I misplayed that so bad VingTsun [12k?]: I think... VingTsun [12k?]: we'll review GoRival [9k]: hehe ok sound sike fun GoRival [9k]: very interesting game tho
VingTsun [12k?]: that was worth more right, instead of taking ko? GoRival [9k]: i think so
GoRival [9k]: i dunt wanna fight ko haha
GoRival [9k]: haha oh eyah GoRival [9k]: :P GoRival [9k]: me tiredtoo GoRival [9k]: haha
Ben:  I personally play on the 4-5 for every 2 and 3 stone handicap game I play.  A thick joseki tends to come in handy in these kinds of games.    For an example of this see the annotated game In Ed Lasker's book Go and go-moku.  (Of course this move is by no means  more or less losing than the 4-5 play)
Jakob: is this the right approach? or should i have made my own shimari instead? i felt that in a handicap game i should try to add some confusion to the board  Ben: Confusion is a good idea in a handicap game and this is a possible move.  See my variation for an alternative plan.
Ben:  Really a play at X is necessary here.  I've actually expermented with this move myself  before -- unsuccessfully.    A commentator at the gtl advised me not to do it anymore  ;)
Jakob: was this move necessary?  Ben: It does seem cautious.  F-16 looks a little more active, or tenuki.  On the other hand this move does have some merit.  It take the corner for black and gaurantees life.  And it probably keeps sente since W has to do something on the top now or the stones become heavy.
Jakob: should i have made a kakari at O17 instead?  Ben: I like k-17 actually.  O-17 is too active.  W has to make strength somewhere otherwise B will shrug off any attacks.
Jakob: here i felt like her shimari as a natural response made her happy  Ben:  Black gained here, X is a concern for W still.
Jakob: also my own follow-up move felt necessary but slow and gote  Ben: You are correct, but this was only because l-17 was bad.
Jakob: i didnt know the joseki of what was to follow... was that ok? what were my other options?  Ben: Well tenuki is always an option.  Consider your tenuki options carefully.  I've heard this move is favorable when W has strength on the right.  I've seen r-7 here for white as well as various pincers.
Ben: I've not seen this move before.  My instinct tells me it works out well for B.
Ben: What if B did this instead?
Ben: This is too easy, r5 again would have been painful for you.
Ben: W gave you a big chance to get back in the game here.  1 for W would be safe (honte) 2 Thick and center-oriented 3 Ambitious/inviting (Amashi strategy)
Ben: This is a good way to help the marked stone and create a shape working for you.
Ben: Locally you played properly, B ends in gote so this was a success.
Ben: B can't prevent an invasion
Ben: This is probably not the best place, play at X to settle the shape (but it's not necessary now).
Ben: At X would put more pressure on B.
Jakob: at this point i felt that my game was running well... her D12 was very weak now, as was her Q8 group. her threat to my lower right corner felt toothless, so i thought that was a mistake of her. 3 corners were my opponents now, but i had some territory on the sides, and my influence towards the middle was good.  but... my D14 turns out to be even weaker then black's D12. how should i have played here locally?  Ben: The middle is quite invadeable by either side yet.  It will be a mutual struggle for points there.  Points wise its still difficult to say, Optimistically W has 15 on the top and left side corner and the right is maybe 10.  B has 20 top right and left for 40 plus the bottom.    As for a better move its probably still at X.  But the peep was worth consideration.
Ben: Always always tenuki this atari until the end.  To fill here is to make a play worth 1 point even if it is sente for your opponent.
Ben: Make the pillar it has less aji.
Ben: This group (marked) is really quite difficult to attack now.  An invasion around X was important.
Ben: Now B handles any invasion with ease.
Jakob: im not at all sure about this move. it just felt good, but actually i dont even know whether this stone did any good at all.  Ben: Well it doesn't really attack, defend or invade anything.  The only thing it might do make some points in the middle but not many because B is sure to start playing there now (and hopefully strengthing the bottom at the same time for instance:
Ben: The marked moves werent worth much and were probably better left as dame points.    Perhaps you were thinking to attack but B lives easily with 1, 2, etc.
Ben:  You played a lot of moves to make a little territory in the middle and B kept pace on the side.  S-14 would have been a little better, your strength on the outside ensures your stones won't die.
Ben: At X was simpler for B.
Jakob: i thought of playin here for some time, but i felt that i wasnt too urgent because i could kill her stone there. i was wrong
Ben: You should probably avoid this fight.
Jakob: this just took a liberty from me i guess  Ben: Its a difficult fight for W in any case.
Gummiente [12k]: hmmmm  Jakob: at this point i tried to read for some time and decided that my group is dead  Ben: Yes, your haven't enough liberties.
Ben: This is a good move for you.
Ben: Excellent
Ben: This is passive though.
Jakob: i shouldve taken my time to read before i cut here
Jakob: should i have plugged this earlier? i thought about playing here for some time, but decided that i couldnt really stop black from getting into here since she had G13 and G8 available  Ben: Right there arent any important plays here. f-17, k-7  and n-16 or n-18 would have been better.  And for B playing the tactic on k-7 would have probably been more valuable so really you caught a break.
Jakob: good she didnt exploit this weak spot earlier  Ben: True
Ben: This is a good move in the endgame.
Ben: You can continue this way.
Ben: Good
Jakob: i played this and immediately thought that this move would be gote...  Ben: It depends as we will see.
Ben: A play at X can be avoided if B thinks there is something bigger than about 5 or 6 points.   Like a monkey jump for instance.
Jakob: ... but she secured there anyway. was that necessary?  Ben: See  variation.
Jakob: i misread here  Ben: Yes I bet you wont forget this one!
Ben: Even so p-9 was bigger I think.
Jakob: that move was horribly small  Ben: Unfortunately yes.
Ben: Excellent!
Ben: Good move ;)
Jakob: horrible misread from me again.  Ben: Yes, some slight calculation could have saved you some points.
Gummiente [12k]: ugh
This jump is suspect, since Q4 is white it's better to take c3 (see variation)
R: This move is better omitted, because later you might want to jump to the corner. . See the normal joseki variation at move 18.
is this ok?  R: The better  move is c3 here. Black can punish c2 by playing c3.
R: C3 is much much bigger: now C2-D2 exchange becomes very bad for white. White needs to finish at C3 before anything else! Otherwise why go c2??
from my view black came out well here - what do you think?  This is a huge loss for white: black is competely safe and got a big corner too. White got very little in return. Now black is well ahead.
proper invasion?  R: Not bad.  You can also consider a probe at d18 first.
right direction? i wanted to avoid white eating up my right side upper moyo - since my right side group is quite low...  R: hard to choose. G17 also fine.
too aggressive? seemed like a weak spot...  R: I'd say this is premature. Take the big points first.    Right now, black is winning alot because of c3 mistake. So you can consider playing safe moves such as c12 instead. Also R3 is very big sente move at the  moment.
any recomondations?   You can also consider E11 instead... it seems to work.
how about this white move?  Seems alittle loose. J15 is better if the aim is to protect  j17.
This is good move.
a good time to attack the corner? or better play 3x3 ?  R: I prefer R3. But would have been better to play R3 before invasion at D8. Now R3 is more problematic. You can also consider H16 now.
black should be dead in the corner, right?  Ko actually, see var.
where to play else?  again, start with h16.
black is still ahead but now white has a chance.
R: This is a typical "xmas present" move. It just gives white territory for free while making black heavier.Instead, consider several variations shown. Please practice avoding moves such as this... see some variations shown.
R: Again, this forcing move is very bad; it reduces white's liberties but gains nothing. See var.
ouch! black got lucky here...
Again, if you practice to avoid moves such as these, your strength will improve by at least 2 stones.
R: sTaking at n8 is better; the point is that you will need to take it eventually anyway, so why not do it right now, and get all the liberties for free! This also shows that q5 is one of those bad forcing moves.
Brilliant move!
good one?  I prefer h16 but this one is ok...
See var
Black is broken now.
good play by white over here
The game is even now.
if you have any remarks on the rest of the game, thanks :)
g18 seems better defense.
[Benedictu5: The most natural moves here were A, B, C or D. The triangled move is rarely seen.]
[thomasben: Is attacking here a good idea?]  [Benedictu5: Sure it is playable. I would prefer to play A, B or C, wich seems more natural]
[Benedictu5: Good move, A and B are other good moves that focus more on the corner where black played.]
[Benedictu5: This is a good move but the move at A is better. Playing at the last open corner is also a good option]
[Benedictu5: This move feels strange. White should have played at A]
[Benedictu5: Playable, but playing at A or B would have been better]
[Benedictu5: a slow move. Should be in the last open corner]
[Benedictu5: a slow move. Should be in the last open corner]
[Benedictu5: The same as the last move: last open corner]
[Benedictu5: White is happy to take the last corner]
[Benedictu5: Casual move, A would be slighly better. The shimari at B is also a good move]
[Benedictu5: Too far! Here one should expect A, B or the kakari at C.]
[Benedictu5: Another slow move. Black should attack this weak group of white! Good moves would be A, B or C]
[Benedictu5: White needs to do something here. This a good move on which the kakari at the topright easely follows. A would give black strong outside influence, which is not wanted here]
[Benedictu5: I like the kakari more]
[thomasben: Isn't play at E16 better for white?]  [Benedictu5: yes, but I like F15 even better]
[Benedictu5: Better atari first]
[thomasben: Is J18 the correct response to stop black from further invasion?]  [Benedictu5: see comment by previous move]
[Benedictu5: bad shape]
[Benedictu5: Bad shape]
[Benedictu5: Slow move! Better cut]
[Benedictu5: Bad shape, better cut and fight]
[thomasben: Can white make a comeback from this ?]
[Benedictu5: 30k mistake]
White resigned here
Kobayashi style,  i know a little about it. But in the game something was played wich i was not familiar with.  < sorry I never played Kobayashi.
The triangle move i had never seen. Could be a joseki but i would not know it.  < have a look at http://waterfire.us/joseki.htm < Q6 is indeed joseki
this is a corner oriented joseki.
I was thinking  about playing at A instead of B.  A was more solid,but pushing from behind.That's why  i choose B.  < I dont like A so b is lokally fine.
To narrow. W should extend to A or Kakari at B
It is stil open, and a move at A would be big for white.  Leaving A open is not the main problem here. Actually w is already overconcentrated here so I would switch to another part of the board A proveb says: stay away from thickness.
a logical follow up of R12 but i still think r12 was not optimal.
this is a bad exchange for w so b is happy.
not the best move.
This move was played by me when i thought ' Where to play?'  Did not want white to get the whole corner with an invasion at B.  This move is fine. Your only bad move here was r12, the rest is good shape.
For me this felt a bit slow for white, an there is stil a gap at A
the 6 triangled stones do not do enough work, so black has the lead.  W started his problems with a narrow extention at Q10 and failed to take advantage with r17 or a usefull tenuki. you played the better fuseki. well done.
Invaded. Is it possible for you to show me some different variations. Because i think this situation happens a lot. So any knowledge would hellp.  < If you invade at once or wait longer is a matter of style. some players will tell you it is bad others will find it natural. I added some other ideas but If you like H17, then go for it.
this is rarely good. have a look at : http://senseis.xmp.net/?ThreeSpaceExtensionInvasions http://senseis.xmp.net/?path=ThreeSpaceExtensionInvasions&page=LowInvasionOfMixedThreeSpaceExtension
Afterwords i thought this was a bit to easy for white.  See variation..  you are right that f18 is bad.
b lost manny points here.
good move!
bad move.. should be at A i think.  I think A is too defensive. Which variation did you fear here?
to passive in my opinion.  However..... it is time to count!  black lower side 38 upper left 26 total of 64  lower right 10 upper right 12 center 6 total of 28  so unless w find a way to reduce the lower side he has to make 36 points in hte triangled areas. Saveguarding the gap at A will help to reduce w's center.
good move
Is this move needed? you must count here ans choose a move which is just deep enough to win and save enough to work.
No it starts to get complicated for me.. any comments are really appriciated
bad move!
w is only defending.
happily connected
to passive b has a solid lead again. I will only make a few comment to the endgame.
nice!
not big
D: Here he makes a mistake.  I marked out the joseki for him after the game.
N: Actually, there is a joseki variation that starts like this, which, depending on a ladder, can be better than the usual one (see variation)
N: This sequence leaves your wall with a weakness, see variation
N: This is a big mistake, W should play in the bottom right corner some more, of course
N: Since this is gote, you might consider playing on the other side right away
N: Unless B is sure that he will kill the W group, he might want to play as in the variation
D: Here I wanted to approach the corner in a way that threatened K3.  Do you agree with this play?  N: First of all, you would have been in a stronger position to attack this stone if you had captured the marked stones at move 63.   I think before approaching the corner, you sould harass the center group a little more and build up strength.
N: I do not agree with this move here. Attachments are for defense, when you are weak, not for attacking. The way your opponent answered it turned out ok for you, but you can't always rely on your opponent to do that :)
N: You make some territorry at the bottom, however the center white group is very strong now.
N: big mistake, see variation
D: This is where I think I need the most help.  I want to use that wall to the right, but if I push him that way he gets a base.  So I push him the other way.  My problem I think is that I'm not good at using my walls to attack yet. I didn't play in that area earlier because of the proverb not to use a wall to make territory.  However, maybe I should have extended from the shimari before 87 to prevent that invasion.  Or maybe the joseki I chose top-right wasn't a good idea (although he made the joseki mistake, so I couldn't predict it).  Your thoughts on this would be much appreciated.  I feel that most of my mistakes I understand after looking at the game, but I'm unsure how to deal with this situation even after looking.  N: I think White was unreasonable in playing there, and you were right in the direction you chose. But again, your attack is not very powerful and white manages to get out.
N: I think this is the right direction here, but maybe a move one to the right might make your wall more stable
N: This move I don't understand. I thought you wanted to attack W and use the wall on the right, not let him run out into the center where he is strong.
N: Now white is out in the center and achieved his objective of reducing your moyo without giving up any points of his own.
This move seemed weak when I made it, but not making it seemed to big a loss.  That probably means 97 was a bad move.
N: I don't think this move works very well, see variation
N: this move I can't understand, only forces B to solidify his position without gaining anything.
N: see variation
N: See how big the difference is between the two marked points? All the squared points would be yours, about 20 points....
N: very minor point, but it's better to just connect at S8 right away and save S6 for ko threats later
N: This is dangerous business. Better to play underneath and be safe.
N: White missed a big opportunity...
This was less of a risk than I had thought.  It certainly lost me the game.
D: Mistake.  N: Right, always play double sente first
[NM] I dont know if this is good direction for white... I think it is ok, it doesnt help black such as c6 or r6
joseki?
[NM] N3 is not the best move for black
is l5 necessary?  [NM] Yes, but D3 might be better choice
[NM] Good fighting spirit, white needs to play a bit active since four handicap
[NM] Not good choice by Black
[NM] Yes, this is big for white
[NM] Black move is good direction
[NM] You did not settle r9 r6 group? You played more active. Now white has 3 weak groups. From Blacks play so far he does not know how to attack strongly otherwise White would be in trouble.
[NM] I am not sure where to play for white now... Black looks to be solid everywhere.
[NM] Good move!
[NM] B11 would be too low for white. Guess your move is good direction, must goto centre
[NM] Mybe best keep this exchange for later... ko threat?
[NM] This move by Black too slow
[NM] I would now try secure R9 , R6 group.
[NM] Not sure what White is trying to do here.
[NM] Black does not need to answer O14
[NM] Good move
[NM]  This move does not do much unfortunately, It does not help R9 group and there is no territory in the middle
[NM] White got her way, lucky :)
[NM] Very slow black move
[NM] Lots of good sente moves for white. B11 is nice move but mybe try sente moves first. be first to get in big yose moves
[NM]  Good, lat 5-10 moves for white gained many points
[NM] F13 is worth about 16 points and another  7 points follow up it is huge!  C10 is worth about 5 points.
reviewee: white seems quite passive, I am happy (and a bit surprised)  Breakfast: White did not make any mistakes yet, but I agree, that he played passively
Outdated pincer
It was a joseki in the past, but nowadays most players think that B is favorable
A is urgent -
Key point!
Keima at A is attractive here -
Risky!
How about keima? -
Strange timing -
Right decision!
Black is clearly ahead
Slack. Better to invade at A directly or ... -
White is happy to answer. The A-B exchange is clearly bad for Black
reviewee: I am satisfied,  Breakfast: I noticed :) But you did few slow moves here, including Q5 -
A is right -
Still can play at A. It's a vital point on the border of two moyos
What is the reason? I don't see any moyos, if White plays at A himself
reviewee: I like to force my opponent to invade so that I can attack then  Breakfast: The wall you made is nice, but how to use it?
So deep! -
Bad idea. It makes B stronger
reviewee: I hallucinated here that this was sente against the corner  Breakfast: yes ... big mistake -
Very bad for W -
Nice attack!
reviewee: looks like a won game now for me (black)  Breakfast: Not yet, but it looks promising for you now
Rude. A is better
It helps W. A is better
A-B exchange is not good
W is leading again
reviewee: i wanted to try this out, white made a mistake later on  Breakfast: Looks like an overplay
reviewee: bad mistake by white to omit his sente J6 which would be  Breakfast: Yes ... Huge mistake -
So lucky!
Can think about Q2 or tennuki
reviewee: enclose or drive white out - I decided to continue to attack center group
Maybe A?
How about tennuki?
Bad shape. A is right
Painful for B
Can start from A
Rude -
You helped W
Slow
W can play tennuki
reviewee: I just wanted to make this a close game now and hoped my felt advantage would hold to the very end  Breakfast: It looks close. Hard to say, who is ahead -
A is necessary -
reviewee: good move by white, I didn't forsee that but black O15 was neccessary I think
Now W is slightly leading
A is better
Slow. A is better -
reviewee: the end game begins and I should be ahead, but, well, lost by 2,5. hmm  Black has no chances after White plays B16. B16 is so big!  Conclusion: You got an early lead in fuseki, but after that ... Instead of playing simplest moves, you tried to fight and attack and lost all your advantage. Later B was very lucky on the lower side and was one step away from winning the game.
[kb]: I have been playing a lot of komoku lately, because I learned since I began how to play with the star point.  I feel it is helping my fighting because you must learn how to play a little bit more relaxed and slow-paced with komokus.
[kb]: Strange, never saw this before.  I thought about splitting at K3   yes normally he would.
very good for black
[kb]: I learned from a book somewhere that this can sometimes be better to keep sente, especially if the game is a framework fight.  I really want to keep it to get the big point on the right side, in order to make the cut at P7 possible.
[kb]: He really wants to play large scale!  Why did White play G2, G3 would have been fine
[kb]: Seems slightly better for Black, considering that Black can reduce this framework pretty easily.
[kb]: A probe
[kb]: I second-guessed myself and played here to counteract any kakari, but on second thought, I would have been better off playing around Q10/Q11 like I thought earlier.  Which is bigger?
[kb]: Good move.
[kb]: Right direction?  yes
[kb]: I felt dissatisfied with this result - should have blocked the other direction.
[kb]: White got himself back into the game.
[kb]: I need to play actively now.   you are not behind
[kb]: I didn't feel I took complete advantage of White's loose shape here, what's the best way to do it?
[kb]: I second-guessed myself here too.  As soon as I played it, I felt I should have played on the right side.
[kb]: He handed me life on a silver platter.  I should have died!
game over   [End of Comments]
[kb]: Great!  I get a splitting attack going.
[kb]: White would have been just fine playing G6.  Now I have another prayer.
[kb]: If I remembered B6, then I would have won by around 5 points or so, but I forgot about it and lost by 5.  No more comments.
linkai1 [1d]: darn, forgot about that point Lol
Alex: It's an unusual opening pattern, but I think it's good for black.
Never seen this. How to response  Alex: I've never seen it either!  I would respond at G15.
is this ok?  Alex: It's OK, but it makes it easy for white to build a moyo on the left.
Alex: I think this is a mistake by white: H15 would be better.
Alex: Good move.
how about this move  Alex: I think this is bad.  It makes a weak group, so that white has a chance to attack.  If you want to play in this area, E10 is a better move.  But I think this isn't urgent: R12 would be even better.
Alex: This is aji-keshi: later on you might prefer to make a different move in this area.  Just play K15 right away.
Alex: This is a difficult position for black.  You'd like to play J14 and double hane (see variation to next move), but it would hurt your group below.  That's why the shoulder hit (D11) doesn't work well.
Alex: I guess this is the best possible move here.
Alex: This looks too soft, but it's hard to find a better way to attack.  L17 instead would be overconcentrated.  Maybe N14? but it looks a little crazy.
Alex: Again, this has a bad effect on your G11 group.  Maybe you could try M15 instead?  (variation)
Alex: I think J13 is better (variation)
Alex: Good idea, but I think K11 should come first.
The following got complicated and I think I messed up  Alex: Yes, it is complicated!  I think M17 is a good move.  You need to keep a sense of perspective here: K17 should be captured, but you can't expect to capture the N16 group now.  I think your mistakes came from trying too hard.
Alex: I think this works, but I'm not totally sure.  If it doesn't work, then L17 is a safer move (variation).
Should I just give up the E17and F17 like in the variation?  Alex: I don't think so, because I don't think white's "tesuji" at J16 actually works...
Alex: Can't black play J15 instead?  I'm not totally sure, but it looks OK to me.  See the variation.
Alex: Good move.
Alex: This isn't so good.  It's aji-keshi again: it makes it harder for black to connect up with J11 (see variation).
Alex: This looks like a nice shape, but there is still some bad aji here: white could cut by playing H10 (see variation to next move).
how about next move?  Alex: Your move looks fine to me.
Should I just invade to like S4 now or build moyo somewhere like c7?  Alex: I think this move is a mistake: white should reply at R9 and take territory.  I think S4 is a good invasion.  C7 is the wrong point for building a moyo (too low), but D8 looks OK to me.  It's hard to say which is better out of S4 or D8.
Alex: This is a mistake by white.  It's a very small move; you should ignore it and play at R6 next.
Alex: Instead, R6 is still good.
mistake! no needed
Alex: This is an interesting move! but it seems to turn out badly... maybe R6 or S5 was better.
Alex: I think R2 instead gives you a bigger corner (see variation).
This lives pretty hard what instead should go?  Alex: Go back and look at the earlier comments!
Alex: I think E10 is a better move here: you still need to defend your weak stones!  See the variation to the next move.
HOw to response?  Alex: J3: make white heavy and attack.  See variation to the next move.  White could have played H10 instead (variation).
Alex: This leaves bad aji behind: you should respond to white's contact move at H5.  It's hard to say what's best: H4 or G4 or H6 (variations).
Alex: Again, I think you should answer white's move.  G6 looks good here.
Alex: Notice how the weak black group is the focus of the whole game!
Alex: C6 is a stronger shape (variation)
Alex: It still looks like a close game.
Alex: This is gote, and quite small.  See the variation.
Alex: E18 instead: it's sente!  (variation)
Alex: Good move.
Alex: I don't understand why white played this.
Alex: Doesn't B1 work?  (variation)
Alex: Now I think white is winning.  This is the last comment.
Chris: This position is too thin. It has occured only twice in pro games, both times, the pincering side won. I have added their variations and what I would play in this position.
Inte heller bra.
If black would have played Q5 instead I think he would have got a nice result. How should I have played to avoid that?
Chris: This is not te right direction. Black does not have to worry at this very moment about the marked group. So moves here help black build up the lower left corner and side. The A stone should be regarded as light for the moment. It also canot be shut in directly. It would have been better to tenuki.
Chris: This is not the correct shape. Whit has to hane, to gain thickness.
Chris: This move is ajikeshi. White could have aimed to seal black in by playing A later.
Had he played M3 instead I think I would have been in trouble. Not sure how I should have responded that.
Chris: This is greedy. There is no threat to the group on the right side. White should have made his centre group stronger, keeping blacks group weak.
Should have played N6 instead, now I can't play as forceably when he tries to connect below. Chris: I agree.
Hade M6 legat på N6 istället hade jag kunna spela L1 här.
Vit kan fortfarande koppla under nu.
Chris: An overplay by black.
The idea was a splitting attack, but not sure on the best point. Chris: A very good idea! White has to lean on the shimari to attack the centre bulk.
This feels like a misstake for black but I failed to capitalize on it. Chris: Another overplay.
Just playing R13 would have been enough?
Not very good I think, black can't connect here anyway so maybe O16 instead?  My whole attack dripped away here and I didn't get enough compensation. Feelt I lost the game here.
Aji keshi but I was trying to defend against black Q17 in sente.
Really bad. I was so desprate to try to get some compensation  that I didn't read before playing.  Should I just have taken sente here and play something on the left or top side instead?  What about S11, could that be considered sente before playing tenuki?
Chris: You should not force black to make eyes inside your terretory.
Chris: If you cannot kill Black by taking this stone, it is only worth 4 points.
Better on J15? Chris: This move is quite good, as it makes black overconcentrated. White has to think about how to strengthen the center group.
Chris: This is not good, as it makes white heavy and helps black split whites position. white has to play lighter than this.
Chris: Even though Black did not attack as hard as he could, the compensation is large.
Should probably play K18 if I want to kill, but does it work?
Chris: Since white connected his groups now, its ok. Now White has to think about how to reduce blacks moyo. It is important to note, that blacks only weakness is around A. It is very difficult to find a good invasion/reduction point. First we should count to see, how much of a reduction is necessary to win.  Black is leading by about 15 points. This means, white has to make around 20 points of terretory in the center. A really hard invasion is therefore not necessary.
Most likely the wrong invasion point.
A disaster, would have been better of not invading at all in the first place with this result. Chris: White forced black to walk into the centre, this is not good indeed.
And here black saves the game for me.
Got 15 points here (20 - around 5 lost in the center). Enough to win the game. Not that much to say after this.
No more moves recorded. W+4.5  I think i had a nice attack going but somehow I completely failed to capatilize on it.  Then I made a really bad invasion and was only saved because of a misstake of my opponent.
[DP did this to stop B making two shimari]
[DP and did this to stop double-wing formation]
[DP is F5 better, attaching to stronger B stone?]  No this move is standard... no idea where F5 would go...
This move is too early though should play at D7 first
this response is... awkward i think
[DP is B2 better for B?]
seems black gets too much and whites wall is already compromised by the F4 stone
[DP Was delighted with result lower left, but is leaving D8 open OK?]
[DP I feel I should have left this and extended to K4 instead]
with this black can aim at strengthening his area in the left while making you run and he can make it so the group that will arise at r5 is already closed in, so ya probably should have extended first
[DP would attacking at N2 have been better for W? wasn't sure I could handle weak L6 group in centre, although I had to in the end!]  If there was a problem with your L6 stones black would have killed them first before living inside, Life inside is usually worth less than running into the middle of the board cause in the middle of the board you arent playing moves inside your own territory
[DP... should I now sacrifice the L8 stones? I feel that all my early advantage has now been lost, and that B has played much better than me since his good M4 move]  at this point in the game... unless you can sacrafice it for a living group around R12 area then i wouldnt, game is too close to give up that much to black
[DP this felt like the correct time for this, given B now strong in the centre?]  The correct time for this was when the cut first existed :) ALWAYS defend your cuts first UNLESS a bigger move is possible.
[DP I figured I had to do something here before it all got enclosed.  I was getting somewhat desperate!]
[DP is F15 better for W here?]
[DP my objective here was to make sure my stones were linked, and that B's were separated]
[DP Overplay?  Not sure I got enough back for my two sacrifice stones]
[DP I struggled to handle this area, so maybe the root cause was an earlier W mistake?]
[DP Is this the best response?]
[DP Is F10 playable for W instead of this horrible empty triangle?]
[DP I feel well beaten-up here, getting separated, squashed, and losing sente]  Ya this hurt mainly because of when you played at F8 the second black moves forwards you had to draw the stones back because they would die otherwise which means you strengthened black and weakend yourself so he could attack
[DP This seemed the right time for this sente reduction?]
[DP Rather small, given what's still open?  Where would have been better for W?]  its sente to save 2 stones so it works... any sente in endgame is ok :)
[DP This caught me out.  Hadn't read it, and didn't like what I saw if I blocked at F14]
[DP I felt B was ahead now, so did some serious counting and checking all the yose. Something I should probably have done earlier... I identified Q10, J6 (with a huge ko looming after G6) and a sente tesuji at F12. Possibly played them in the wrong order though?]
[DP I felt playing M13 rather than B14 meant that W won the game here]
ya... game ends with this move
[J] An ideal place to play a little more ambitiously. A would be a more dual purpose move, being a good extension from both white corners. A black invasion becomes an opportunity to build a wall up into the centre while chasing.
[J] Now it is obvious R8 should have been at A, then instead of R14 you'd have played the better response at B without much thought. B is still better even now I think.
[J] Now you are overconcentrated on the right hand side. Black has spread around nicely and can now play a big move (not the one black actually played though). Something a little more ambitious would be good, try to make the marked stones do a little more work.
I made this move because I read commentary about the same move in another game. But I don't think it makes sense in this game. I think Black could have found a better outcome if he had taken A or B at some point, possibly later in the game. (See variation. Am I missing something?)  [J] A or B are both bad for black (at the moment anyway) as it creates a hane at the head of two stones, good for white.  I don't much like R10 for black either. Not really any room to develop.
[J] Black plays big first ... white is overconcentrated on the right.
[J] Black would have to be happy with how this works with A.
[J] Bigger places to play ... see variation for what happens if black really wants those two stones.
[J] Black responded passively to this so may be it worked ok, however just using the thickness at A to take territory is not good use of thickness. See variation.
[J] This invites black to damage white and removes the possibility of invading at the 33.
[J] See var.
[J] As white you now have thickness at A pointing to thickness at B. Just using thickness for territory is not the best use of thickness.
How should I respond to G13?
[J] This is placing importance on making territory where you are already overconcentrated, in and around A.
This is a poorly thought out invasion.  [J] Yeah, better to work the other end.
[J] Wrong side.
[J] Letting black get this hane is unpleasant for white.
I was relieved when Black made this move. I thought I could win the fight if he moved at A, but I wasn't completely sure. I wonder: should I be able to read this out with ease? When I read it out in my head, I was only 95% certain that I would win the fight. It's a simple sequence, but I was afraid I was missing a hidden atari. (See variation.)  [J] I think you read it ok. Black is better to take this and move on anyway.
[J] Also big for black.
[J] A little passive. I think black's hane is an overplay. See variation.
Poorly thought out invasion with White 130. This stone would end up deciding the game, but that was more luck than strategy.  I was so keen to invade that I overlooked the major vulnerability at A.  [J] Yeah, urgent first, big second.
Terrible oversight on my part. Black and White both make several mistakes in the follow through to this invasion.
A move at A would have saved Black here I think.  [J] See alternative a couple of moves up.
Black resigned.
Usually black attaches to secure a base (see variation)
FR: Is it better to pincer at C8 or D8? Sure those pincer's are possible not my favorite though.
This move is a good idea but a little too soft (see continuation) If you want to secure the corner you might consider c5 instead.
By the way, this has reverted to the avalanche joseki.  As if it were played as shown on the numbers.
This move is technically possible but usually people play either A or B.  A is fairly simple (see variation) B is extremely complicated and I don't recommend it.
A is better, following the proverb "hane at the head of two stones"
A is easier =).  In general its a good idea to connect at a peep.
FR: Is this approach to the corner right? Maybe q5 or even settling bottom with l3 better.  This approach is fine, q5 is fine as well.
Again attach at A as shown earlier.
FR: to peaceful :(Was R12 or Q12 more  appropriate?  This move is a good idea in theory.  It is a double purpose move,  helping the base of your r5 and r8 stones while pincering the r14 stone.  But I think this move is a little bit cramped so playing two spaces further at r12 is better.
This is a good idea again, but its a little bit too passive.  See continuation
FR: I think, it's my big misstake. Was it better to defend the corner by o17?  Its probably slightly better to defend the corner because the e16 stones can secure a bse easily by attaching at c17.  However I don't think its a major issue.  This way is certaintly playable.
Good job crushing white's shape!
FR: Moves 49-53 look like i'm helping white to build wall. Is it necessary for p16 to run to the center or tenuki was better? If "yes", then where to play?  Yes you are helping white build a wall, but you are building your own wall with the triangled stones.  Also your wall is better then white's wall because your wall is facing a weak group and will help you to attack the squared stones.  While white's wall is facing black's strong group at k17.  So this is locally good for black.   To answer your question.  Yes it is necessary for p16 to run to the center because its base is not secure.  So this is a very good way to play.  Split white into two weak group while securing space for yourself in the center.
These are the two biggest mistakes by black of the game so far.  White should play at A.  However, white's group is weak and needs to run to the center.  So black's one and two force white to the center (at A) which is exactly what white wants.  So instead black should try to surround white without attaching and pushing.
A stone is very big because it prevents whtie from making an eye so you should save them.
playing t11 is big because it prevents white from making two eyes.  If white cuts at r9 you can simply ladder at s9
FR: Here i wanted to reduce white's potential moyo at the bottom, but just helped them to build quite big territory. So, is L3 good, Maybe something around j4 better?  L3 is fine,  m3 is slightly better shape in relation to o3 ( see continuation)
This is super good result for black, now black has the opportunity to attack and possible kill white's q3 stones.
Keep attacking white's stones! shame to let it live so easily.  A and B are vital points of the shape.
A is better.  Its good to surround your opponnents stones.
FR: In the game i hoped to get som territory with k7, but it was very small. Now i think, that it was wrong dirrection, but just dont know, where to play? Maybe f9 or something around h12?  Yes k7 is very small, only a couple of points.  Instead black should continue to attack white's q3 stones.  When this is finished black should start endgame (c19 for example).  As a general rule, when you odn't know where to play its a good time to start endgame.
Now white has settled and black's chance of attacking is finished. Good result for white.
A is better, don't get cut
FR: I think k15 is very bad. Was j10 better?
Strange move.  This move is normally an approach at A -D because...
Black takes a second shimari in sente.
This is not the correct strategy for this board.  It could be playable, but definitely not the best out of all possible strategies.  K4 is a moyo move but white is strong on the right (he has miai extensions at A and B so you cannot weaken him).  If you tried to construct a moyo....
White gets this very nice point.
Good move, just keep in mind h3.
Attachment here is nice.
I like your choice here.
This move is not good for white, black will trade thickness for territory here and severely damage whites moyo.
Let's look at some variations.
When white wedges here he needs to have two ladders.
And this one although..
Your ladder break does not end up working.
This is bad result for black.
Very aggressive but I guess you have to be at this point.  However I think that...
Nice point.
I had to think awhile on this one :)  Because white neglected J2 you have a chance in this game.  If black's bottom group were weaker you would not.  Your strategy at this point is to attack r10 to make center influence facing whites moyo so you can erase it.
I'd ignore you, this is small.
W still should tenuki
This actually doesn't work for white believe it or not.
This was terrible for white.  It has nothing to do with overconcentration.  His l4 group got cut off and you walked into his moyo. Now p 10 looks useful
But now the idea is, how to attack these two groups?  First off l3 is like almost a strong group so its harder to attack.  Second, the border between the black and white moyos is at the top.  You want to use this attack to gain control of that border.
this is very slow.  You've lost the initiative.
Fancy looking move but i think a but much.  I may have come up with a way to counteract but its really too complicated for me to give you a definitive answer (smile).  However what i can tell you is that the strategy here would be to ladder p 8.  Ladder = ability to cut.  Overall this should be okay for you.
nice move.
Strange move.
very big for white to get this
?????
Its not garbage, it is fun looking but yeah you do need to play a much bigger point
No more comments, just endgame.
Yeah this was pretty rude of him.
Corners first: Choices are 3-3,3-4,4-4, and others. 3-3 is corner done -- all territory no influence -- can be sealed in 4-4 all influence, but can be invaded -- takes 2 more moves to seal it 3-4 splits influence and territory -- takes 1 more move to seal it (has direction
White is all influence no territory, black is splitting the difference Hierarchy of move orders says Corners first, corner enclosures or approaches next, side extensions after that
Shows black to be a bit jealous of the influence White is trying to build.  this is like a side extension with no support, it's a spoiler move, and inconsistant with black start.  A proper move would be to enclose one of his corners.'  A) is the best move -- it encloses the corner and sets up a big move along the top side interfereing with whites influence but supporting his own enclosure B) is second best -- encloses the corner supportingn a side extension but not as strong a support as the high move C)  is third best -- encloses the corner D) is fourth best -- encloses the corner, but is open at the bottom side
personnelly I think the top corner is bigger, as an enclosure there has more influence on the top
inconsistant - Black has a weak stone on the left side and is now trying to make influence.
This is not joseki
vernon: Was this a slack move? I was worried that the corner would come under intense attack.  The corner is perfectly safe -access to right side and bottom and plenty of room to live.  This is small
1 move for the corner and an approach move, 1 more move and whites corner is done.  Because of the weak nature of the black stone on the top, white essentiall gets a free move.
vernon: I did not think this was a strong move. It gave me the freedom to not respond.  This is a pass, the black stone is still captured in a ladder
black got to the corner first.
I think the corner enclosure for white is bigger as it sets up an attack on J3 stone
sides extensions is correct but this is a 3 space extension enclosing maybe 10 points.  Extending along the right side is about 15 points, and attacking the white bottome left corner is bigger still (see whites variations chain earlier)
This only gains 4 more points and very small
White got the bigger side, it's a spoiler move, but still big,
invading is bad, J3 can be hurt in return
vernon: I decided that this would save the group. However, I believe that the following variation kills it.  Black is alive because of the atari at D5 sets him free
vernon: This move guarantees life for the corner. See variation for a possible kill.
vernon: This is actually incorrect. The correct move was A4. See variation.  No this is actually correct: as now the atari at D5 is gone and black must play B2 to live
This move protects the cut at E3, and is not really big at all.  Losing E2 is small, white can take a big top left corner or just directly attack J3
J3 is safe now
1 space jumps are for running away, sometimes we lean them in a direction to gain momentum for an attack later.  There isno attack here, so why lean towards strength.  J5 is better,  And if 1 space is good then 2 has to be better as black is not that weak here anymore
These triangled spaces are Whites = 17 points a move at A increases the value of this area by maybe 5 more points.
vernon: A critical shoulder reduction move, in the face of a thick formation. Because this stone lived, B won with the reverse komi.
The shoulder hit cost white 5 points, it's not so big
YES finanlly a huge move
vernon: This light group needs to run or make eye space. It can either flee to Q17 (upper right), to J3 (lower side), or to C10 (left side). C10 is being shut away, but ironically, it is the very group with which Q10 connects.
These two groups are weak, splitting the apart first is a good idea, then one might die and white can win with this large komi
vernon: a strong move that uses P4's thickness. B has no choice but to give up N2 rather than suffer a bigger loss, IMHO.
vernon: J3 uses Q10 to make territory in the lower center, but the connection path to Q10 is cut.
vernon: M7 wisely connects to P4, as it is about to be surrounded.
vernon: A different strategy would be to play N15 or O16 to finish Q10's connection to Q17. I decided, however, that reducing W in the upper center would gain more points.
vernon: I still thought I could connect Q10 to Q17, but I was wrong.
vernon: I decide to save the corner and lose the connection. Now the connection to C10 looks likely.
vernon: This guarantees the cross board connection.
vernon: W senses the danger to O16 and protects instead of attacking the corner more severely. Was this correct?
vernon: Perhaps not needed. Would there be more points at N18?
vernon: This move is too bold for the weak link between Q10 and C10.
vernon: I decide that this area reduces W more effectively.
vernon: This should probably be at G9 (mark) or F9. Later W takes the E10 group because of that weakness.
vernon: Good move takes many points.
vernon: This stab succeeds in taking some points.
vernon: I became too nervous about the viability of this group. Was this correct? F9 and N9 are both possible moves.  S3 seems to be a vital point, but I don't see how to kill black, there is just too much room, it's at least a seki
vernon: Both the lower left and the upper right corners are good Ko threats for W.
vernon: Now that Q10 is connected, it also has eyes.
vernon: This is incorrect, but I am not fixing it. Move 36 went on A4, and move 232 captured on A5.
vernon: wasted move.
vernon: last point in the game.
Salient [20k?]: hello
Deg [?]: hello
xxc : why not, but it can induce troubles latter each mark is a common  staying in line with simple moves may be better when you'r in search of improvment
xxc : better to strenghten the lone one here
xxc : here again
xxc : what about starting to think the way i introduce this comment ?  status of each groups here ? all seems ok no ? B and W the weaker may be the upper one B, but ... can find a way out (center A,B) and a base (1, 2)  by the way with such high stones (4th line) center may be the best target  then, a move elsewhere seems a good idea  a threat ? W left and right looks ok and difficult to attack now (this may result in a stronger group dangerous for the B one  then take a big one : marked lower
I'm not sure how to respond to K3, although in hindsight it looks like an attack from the sides might have been more effective.  xxc : i think so
xxc : may be difficult from here for B  W can find an easy way to live here, too much space
xxc : i think it may be better to forget these stones for now and wait, maybe they can help later  all i can read are difficult path here, it wont help
xxc : same result but stronger one space back
xxc : A threatening B  help B corner ( and side) while destroying the W base
I'm not sure how to contain white. He cuts upward with two double ataris that I didn't see coming.
xxc : here again a look at whole board is usefull  first answer : are marked B stones important ? if yes, then a save is necessary, if not, play eslsewhere  answer ? i may say no  next : group status all seems ok  next : time to strike or to protect something (meaning spend a stone now to prevnet problems latter and then win one or more stones latter) this time the answer seems to be here ... where to protect ?  i think 1 seems good this help the B group and it will be usefull later to fight upper right side later  a move at 4 go for the center, the first idea wiht the 2 dead stones JK4
xxc : nearly the same comment as previous one protect seems the key here and still the same side 1 or 2  beside that it can be possible to introduce an other interesting  idea B starts with taged stones, and now, these seems useless don't you think so ?  from 2 strong positions facing south side, B got nothing here but a strong W group with quite a lot of points and some weak points in his own shape shoud be beter to have a lighter W group inside and B stones arround the square no ?
xxc : connect ?
xxc : a ko ?  here again it would be time to look at the whole board  all groups ? no changes from previous status  weak points still here at left, but it seems safer now  it may be time to strenghten upper B group ? perhaps some early yose too ?
xxc : just connect
xxc : again, look at the whole board  from now (a little earlier perhaps, but previous moves are in the good way) it's also time to think about points  all groups should be really ok at this point of the game (100 moves) but there is still space all arround  then it is necessary to take time to get a rough idea of this, where are points and how much ? can i expand mine, can i reduce ?  and are there still spots for invasion ?  of course oi can't show all of those, but some ideas
xxc : forgot it
xxc : doesn't protect the cut  and why connect 2 living groups ?
xxc : this is really late yose
I knew he could probably cut here, but never felt like I had enough initiative to protect it without losing more somewhere else.
Salient [20k?]: ouch
Q10 its not a bad move, it helps you to settle your territory and framework. To me this seems like a shusaku like fuseki (opening), i guess that atacking its a best move. (b,c or d)
This isnt a bad move, but again, atacking will be a more interesting aproach.
Good move. Maybe D15 would do a better work.
A interesting move.
"I felt sure that White can't live, but he did." Someone told a while a very good proverb for this case:  "Its Not dead, until its dead".  With that in mind, you should asume that it can: a) escape b)live  The tow options arent very good for you anyway, but there is a always a good side of the things. You should remember that te best way to build territory is putting pressure on weak enemy groups, just like you did.   Try to attack always using your strong groups/formations as a wall, so your opponent will a have a very bad time. In this case R9 would be better. Lets see.
You dont need to protect the cut YET.
Put pressure on te groups to get the sente (initiative)
Good timing.
The group its alive, i suggest that you redo some TsumeGo (problems of life and death). With a little practice you will recognize the shapes of living/dead formations.
You should remember that 1 stone isnt important when the game its at hand. Besides you need more territory. P10 would do the work.
I thought I had to play here to avoid a cut later, but now White escapes and runs rampant.
"Trying to surround from a distance, but it doesn't work." You are right on your idea, but N11 its not the move(not for the moment). You STILL NEED more territory, so go for it!.
Good.
Not a good one. Yes you threathen white but at the end you will have to concede some of your stones for that (not a very good trade.
This is a severe attack, you need to respond with the same intensity ;-). (There is a lot of follow up moves, i put only the ones that came to me right now)
More solid.  M18 its better.
G8 its a bigger move.
Again... you need to do more solid moves like G5. in the endgame, it helps you a lot.
Not necessary. G9 its better.
Still G9 its a good move.
"Trying to cut and separate him. I end up losing a number of stones, but also making life in the lower right." That its a good way to learn when to cut/not cut at your opponent. Trying its always the best thing (some say "cut first, think later"). But remember: NEVER COUNT WITH THE MISTAKE OF YOUR OPPONENT. you need to think as a perfect player. In the end, the one who take advantage of the other side mistakes will win.
This moves are very logical, so i dont need to say anything.
White made a big mistake.
Another invasion, but I'm able to stop it this time. I am weak at fighting, and not sure how to improve in this area.  The best form to improve its see pro games, i recomend you games of Lee Changho and Lee See Dol   (you only need to look at them, dont try to remember all the game, just observe the fights).
Bad foe white (as you can see...)
Q13 its better.
You let white tou run a lot on your territory, but its not your fault on that time, you only need to build a more solid framework on the early game.
I hate being invaded. I was able to stop White, but it was tense. In the rematch game, I didn't succeed.  Dont stress yourself with that kind of moves, it happens a lot, you just need to remember to push your enemy against your walls or strong groups. R18 is the move.
Very good moves, interesting tesujis, you just need to do more tsume go and master them.
Black has few options here, but F16 is not one of them. A and B is common.
This move is bad, after white plays C15  he gets better result.
This is very peacefu, i would prefer to use my wall at the left.
This is odd, see variation.
Now black is missing good follow up to create influance.
Black is giving up to much this way, white already got both corners and H17 area is not very safe or big.
Brian: During the game I didn't expect this move to be sente, but I did feel a bit uncomfortable leaving it alone.  This is quite big move, just feels to slow, if white adds same move at the bottom black is behind for sure.
Looks quite slow for black, i would prefer to play around F3 directly.
Brian: Wasn't sure how to deal with the moyo, so I played what I thought was best, would be apprciated if you could give some other options.  I do not really like it, you  just get weak group and nothing else. I would just play F3 or F4 because of better follow ups.
This is bad move, F3 gives nothing 2 you while white E2 or E2 will give him whole corner.
This is small move, it is better to attack white stones.
Brian: I thought this exchange was fair, not sure though.  It isn't bad but you could probably try to attack white on bigger scale.
If you plan to cut at M12 you could try to play P17 first to destroy connection.
Brian: Silly of me.
Very small move, you could tenuki insteed.
I guess you like to make nice shapes but when it is not needed to make nice shape better connect solidly, there will be no ko treats for white.
If you want to play here it is better to skip T4 T3 exchange.
And, that's the end.
hard to decide,i went for the corner  Dtyler : Ok
looks like a fine move  Dtyler : See variation.
perhaps r4 is better here?  Dtyler : See variation.
probably too early,but i am not sure whats the move  Dtyle : Wrong direction.
corner or this group-i took the corner
i decide to abandon this group,since its useless maybe i should run with it?  Dtyler : Bad result for black.
Dtyler : Wrong direction. See variation
small?
right direction?  Dtyler : Black can't kill so white lead a lot.              I finish my comment here.
not good
I decided to count and i found out,my score feeling really bad ^^ thanks for you time
i almost don't know any joseki so i'm not sure if black 13 must be at C12 or C11 that's why i tried to play security.  -----------------------------  You played correctly here. C11 invites white to play C13 and cut/fight. See variation.
Here you play too low. You should play as in the variation, on 4th line (see variation). You are very strong here and should look for development at large scale. The stone at Q11 would combine nicely with the shimari at R5. The proverb says that if you have played on 3rd line, the ideal combination should be on 4th line.   In short:  4th - 4th too high 3rd - 3rd too low 3rd - 4th combine well.
this invasion at C3 is an example of direction of play that i would like a part of your comments to be about. (i mean if timing is correct or this is too soon or if the result is more positive for white since he has a lot of influence on both side and center)  ------------------------------  In my opinion there are other bigger points on the board that you could consider first. I think it's an error as white would block at C4 and make a big moyo with the help of C10 (see further comments on this at move 28).  See variation for better move.
Follow up from move 17.  If white has the chance of playing at A, he has certainly succeeded in creating a large and strong moyo that would balance with your right side (which still is open to attack).  This is the consequence of invading at move 17. Please review the alternative at move 17.  White is very happy giving away the corner and that is what I would recommend you to do on the variation.
i'm not sure K17 is right here...  -----------------------------------  This move depends on your playing style. This is certainly asking for a fight (that followed). I like this kind of moves, but usually I play them against players of my own level. Remember that if you play against a stronger player, he will have the advantage in any fight and complex situation. That's why he is (still) stronger than you.  A less risky move and easier to play move is the one I already recommended before, the ogeima at A (like in move 17 on the variation).
This is too low and a mistake. Please see variation.
In the end, you ended up giving away the corner anyway, so that's why my recommended move makes sense.  Now you have a group on the top that will have to live.  To be fair, this kind of moves for a 12k are still quite impressive and still good. But you want to improve, right?
from there i was clearly planning to make territory in the center trying to make influence on it before.  --------------------------------------  It's too late to do this because of the big influence that white has on the bottom. Any kind of territory in the center, will simply disappear.  At this point, black's potential territory won't increase much, meanwhile, white's will certainly increase in the bottom/centre.  I would say that black will keep the points it has and maybe add 10 more. White has much more potential and its points are safer too.  Let's see what happens next!
Good sequence of moves. In the appropriate direction. Well done.
It's a pity that the marked stones are destroying the points that you would be making for free thanks to this attack against white.  The biggest mistake was the invasion at C3.   Your tactics are quite good, you don't make mistakes in that. Your strategy is the weakest link here. you need a consistent plan. This can be gained by reading books or reviewing professional games. My advice would be to find a friend who is a strong player and give you some guidance.  It is very good that you don't make tactical mistakes, it's the way forward. You "just" need to improve your plan.  Play a hundred games and review them all after playing them. Look for the "losing move". If you do that, you will have a better plan in future games and quickly become stronger.  Good luck!!!  (more comments follow, so this is not the end of the review)
As you can see, white has a plan. He/she is building a moyo and making points.  I want you to do that. :)
another example of direction of play that i would like you to make comments about is this invasion. (too far inside or not enough, too soon, is there another place on the board to be considered before? I'm always trying to think of this but the answers are fuzzy most of the time. )  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  Here there are two concepts to take into account:  If you play close to the squared line, you are reducing. If you play far from the squared line, you are invading.  How far is far?  I think the point you chose is just in the border, so I would say that it's a mild invasion or a risky reduction.  How risky it is?  It depends in how many directions you can run. If you take a look at the triangled stones, they are your "friends", if you run in their direction, you are "safe".   When you can run in 2 or more directions, you are safe, so you can take more risk than normal.  However, if you can only run in 1 direction, then it is very high risk to be captured, and a mild reduction would be better.  In your case you have 3 directions to run to (top left, top and top right). So you are quite safe IF YOU INVADE 2 SPACES AWAY FROM THE SQUARED LINE. If you go deeper than 2 spaces, you will have to fight for your life and probably die.  I hope these rules help you in the future. You chose the right spot this time, do it again next time!
Now you are in the lead, thanks to your invasion. You should be comfortable now and have an easy win. What happened?
Overplay. This cut does not work yet. If you had an additional stone at P4, it would have worked. See variation.
In the variation, I want to show you that you were still safe on the bottom left corner, which is where you lost.
Like this, you win by 18.5 points.
from black157 to black159 or black 163 (don't remember well) i was out of time that's why i played strange and may be silly moves.  ------------------------------  Thanks for the tip, it happens to all of us. The stronger you are, the fewer mistakes you will make, but all of them will be dangerous.
I must say that white was VERY PASSIVE in the yose and you were quite lucky for this. White didn't even fight the kos.
Big mistake, the correct move is the one I've shown you 3 times already. It's a classical book position that I hope you'll remember from now on ;) See variation.
and finally here i was quite tired (3am home) so i misread this sequence. ---------------------------  At least, you could have got a seki and still win by 6.5 points. (see variation).  I'm sure you'll progress very quickly into single-digit kyu.  Good luck!  [End of commentaries by DonPimpon]
[Mathieu] C16 is better when black has a stone around D10. Here it isn't bad, but probably a bit slow... And White is happy to reinforce his stone by playing D15.
F17 or G17 normal here?  [Mathieu] I think F17 would be ok, but I would prefer F16, regarding the black stone on the upper right. You can do someting with that wide extension, like setting your own stones (see var.)
[Mathieu] This a bad move... You just take the shape Black wanted to give you ! In fact, if you had just D15 and D12, Black would play C16 to take the corner in sente and make you heavy ! Remember : "From a wall of two stones, make a three space extension" You should play at either A or B.
[Mathieu] Here you can see that it would have been really better to have the D12 stone one space further... C6 is really far from its allies !
Is this sequance normal for b? Seems to leave R6 stone alone.  [Mathieu] It isn't the joseki sequence... See var.
Not sure on best way to play from here.  [Mathieu] I don't know exactly what is best but R8 is to low I think, Black can play at A if he wants and escape (see var.). I would prefer to play at A or B (probably B), but you must be careful of the sequence Black C, White D, Black E that can occur later.
[Mathieu] Was the A I mentionned earlier.
[Mathieu] Good ! Here it is better to extend just two spaces because I you just follow the rule, as black is strong in this region, you can get in trouble.
[Mathieu] Be careful...
Ways to improve this sequence?  [Mathieu] Yes, just here you should play A instead of N5 because else the corner is dead... (see previous var. for other ways)
[Mathieu] A still very important.
This move feels akward. Not sure how to respond as b.  [Mathieu] Well... I would say, why not ? If I was black, I would play at A, simply trying to take profit on the bottom, and not worrying about white's moyo on the left that can be reduced because the white's stones are too far from their allies.
[Mathieu] Too submissive.
[Mathieu] Not consistent with white marked stone. If you play A, you want to make a moyo on the left side. I fyou invade, you will take profit but black will become thick and can reduce and invade your moyo. You have to choose a strategy and stay coherent with it.
Tenuki here? Seems top is big right now.
[Mathieu] Now, Black can pincer the two marked white stones around A.
Pincer here leaves up right corner weak, not sure how to approach this stone.  [Mathieu] (See var.)
Feels akward.
[Mathieu] You can still play at A (See var.)
[Mathieu] Hummm... The purpose of this stone isn't clear. Better to take your sente to play elsewhere around A perhaps (B's still here !)
H15 feels wrong now.
How best to invade here?  [Mathieu] Hard to tell... Perhaps A is a good opportunity too but this don"t seem bad to me. Remember that this invasion could be dangerous for the black s6 group. It isn't alive yet !! (as long as you haven't play P4)
Seems now Q13 or R12 was better?  [Mathieu] For black ? This can be good, but Q 13 seems really better than R12.
S16 better?  [Mathieu] No !!  (See var.)
[Mathieu] No need to be afraid (see var.)
This move seems to work well, but not exactly sure how to use it best.  [Mathieu] If you want to go out, better to force at A
Too early for this stone?  [Mathieu] Probably makes your group alive... But If you want to do so, you always miss A !
[Mathieu] It hurts !
[Mathieu] White really too nice !
Feels wrong for b.  [Mathieu] Perhaps better to play H16 as black (see var.)
[Mathieu] ost the forcing move at A.
b now becoming desparate to enter left side.
[Mathieu] Black can enter at A (see var.)
[Mathieu] Could have been done in one move...
[Mathieu] Wrong. See var.
I want to attack N6 grp now to gain thickness against left side, not sure why I played this way first.  [Mathieu] I would prefer playing at A... No risk that White build a moyo.
[Mathieu] Got some profit, but white thickness is formidable.
Where should b aim now?
[Mathieu] White is loosing his time trying to save this stones. He should have abandoned it first.
Still trying to find a way into left side, but seems hope is lost for that.  [Mathieu] There is still A that can give you some profit or let black enter (see previous var.)
Maybe somehow here?  [Mathieu] Too late now that white played B16... (See var.)
How big is B19 now?  [Mathieu] I think about 4 points ?
Feels like i can win this ko as b, is this best?  [Mathieu] If you're sure to win, yes it is.
S1 now or fill ko?  [Mathieu] Since your group on the top is alive, S1 is better ! But in fact, you shouldn't have played the ko on the top, you should have provoked this one and won it !
Hi, thanks in advance for reviewing. I play black.  I am really interested on fuseki and general flow of the game, even more than in concrete plays
I have yet to study these josekis, R5 is not joseki. How should white punish it? Also, given the board position, which move should follow R8?  What White did in the game was a good way of punishing it I think. If you just look at the end result, White is getting 2 solid groups with a fair amount where as Black is not getting much. I think playing around O4 would be better for black, attacking the corner stone from 2 sides. See the Kogo joseki dictionary for more details on this variation.
I wanted some center influence with P9 and P10, perhaps R14 only helped white get settled.  I am not too sure about the influence here, you center group is quite weak here. You also don't have a moyo, so it's hard to use those center stones efficiently. As for R14 move, I won't criticize it, it seems really urgent at this moment.
Not sure about R7  It doesn't do much. I am inclined to think taking sente is better. However you if do want to play in this area, S5 is better I think.
Defending here is a waste of time, just take sente now.
Was C13 a good answer?
I think playing at F10 is better here. You keep him weak that way and you can keep attacking him.
Good point for invasion?  Yes, this is the perfect point indeed.
I think there are bigger points now than J12.
I marked some bigger point
Necessary?  Yes, otherwise White playing at B9 would kill.
W took sente... See my variation how to keep sente.
I think this was a bad move  Yeah, it's quite small. I marked some big points again.
Chinese opening -- I stick to it :P
korean style-- I have not studied the joseki sufficiently  Joeski Shown.
White mistake here. Must play B6. You should play D5 now to make yourself stable.
see if it works out,
unusual play  Yes c3 is what w is supposed to play but the continuation played still has black unstable.
The hand has two purposes. One,prepare to attack the white group. Two,stabilize black self  Yes taking care of the group is good though E16 for u is also very good. :P
Having other better hand ?  This seems like only move to me. You should keep left and top white stones seperate.
I think H16 works for you if you want corner.
You have a good cut at E12. W will have to choose to live inside or run out.
I am proud of it:)  It's good you're looking for new moves to stay light and u also try to attack white here.
The hane here weakens your hoshi stone very badly. There isnt much you can do because of the two sides being seperated by whites group.
You can choose to live under by playing R14.
black look not good You can still live by playing S14
A floating group is running out. fighting seems to be enevitable.  Yes but you look like you have a bigger advantage espicially if you push the weak group to your black wall at D8.
One stone,three birds:)  I might of of attacked in centre a bit more. W move didnt help him though.
this or kosumi to keep them disconnected for sure.
M10 works but is kind of weird.
Quite the sacrifice there.
Interesting though I think it
The black group is almost dead ,but thereafter it survives. Incredible.  Yes W wanted to live somewhere else for some reason xD.
Very interesting seki here xD.
White 's territory has bad aji
Bad by white
I almost win
GoRiP: bonne partie GoRiP: ;) Worgle [13k]: bonne partie
Worgle : I'm not sure about this move. I was thinking of closing the corner and press the black stone at the same time... but I m not sure it was good...
Worgle : Was it better to jump to the center with F5 ?
black missed a chance by playing this move. See variation
this move is wrong. it is important to take first sente and play the extension on the left side. it would be an extension both from the wall and from the upper corner
Worgle : is this sequence ok for white ? Can I end it here ?
Worgle : This two black stones looks weak to me, but should I attack them now ? And if yes how ?
I think it is better to invade here than attacking the black stones. You should attack weak stones to gain something. if not, play elsewhere
this is completely wrong. compare with the other option.
white gets a comfortable extension and it cannot be well attacked as in the other option, because c16 is far
Worgle : When all the sides are almost taken, I never realy know where to play. Is L15 ok ?  I think l15 is not ok because m17 cannot be killed easily this way. it can live on the side. I'd better defend the corner while attacking
Worgle : This hurt ! After this move I thought I will lose this game... Is there anything that I must do against this move right now or earlier in the game ?  Clearly, better to reduce before. Two issues:  1 - I think that anyway you can win if you start the endgame and play the big points.  2 - e15 looks to me as an empty move. what is his purpose? does it mark points or attack something?
this is another empty move, because it doesn't mark points. better to take yourself the point that you induce black to play
the idea is good: push the weak group towards black moyo and then destroy the moyo
here you missed a good move. o10 is not threatening very much
Worgle : I think this is a good move again... Can I do something ?  Reduce and take the points. if you want to defend the white group, reduce his corner
black gained a lot of points by playing first the big sente endgame moves
Worgle : Maybe I need to defend this corner before black play this move...
Contact plays are usually defensive moves.  They encourage both sides to make their stones strong.  Since white has played into black's area of influnce, the right side, black should hesitate before making white strong here.    See variations for some alternates.
White is nicely settled here.  Black's attachment at R6 encouraged white to build a living shap in black's influence.  In exchange, black secured a corner that was not highly very contested.   black loses out in potential unnecessarily.
Marco: I dont wanted white to get the extension point in front of my corner enclosure. I'm not sure if it would be better to extend to A or B here  Andrew:  Perhaps asking which of those does white want to play more is the better question.  K17 looks like a reasonable move for white too, where as K3 looks like black could even pincer it at G3.  White is less willing to play around L3 as black is strong there with O4 attached to a living corner.    K17 however is far enough away from Q17 that wK17 is not so easily pincered by black.  So of the choices hwere, I think K17 is the better.    You might even think about going further with both extensions.  E16 or F3 both look like good moves also.  Less conservative, and both are not given to securing territory.  However, both your corners are secure, so why not push the envelope a bit.
Pincer?  I think this is a white over play.  black has a lot of room around a stone at K3 to make it live.  White is not so fortunate.
This feels out of step with where the action is.  Weak stones are a good indication of where you should play, and the only weak thing around is M3.    Further, white didn;'t have a lot of potential here.  There are only two stones on this side of the board, so it will take many more stones to make some white territory here.    E16 or K3 are more urgent for you because you expand existing potential with E16 and exploit existing strength with K3.  Black has 3 stones on the upper side, so has a much better chance to turn the upper side in to bigger territory with a move like E16 then white has to turn the left in to territory with D10 say.  Black has 4 stones invested in the bottom right, so exploiting their strength should also be a goal.
C10 also encouraged white to play this, so a black approach near F3 is not so good anymore.  This makes the pincer at M3 less playable.
Black does need this move now.
Black encouraged white to make a move the black himself would have done very good to play.  Since C13 is needed, the trouble move is still C10.
This is just too slow.  Black's extension is pretty solid as white does not have any really strong stones (ie thickness) nearby.  This is over cautious, and you lose a good opportunity to take a good chunk of the upper side with G17.  See variation
Now it is white who is forcing.
The pincer is taken away from black here.  Now white has a large stake in the lower left corner.  Thankfully the 3x3 point is still available.
This is small since white is not weak at R10.  Further, the 3x3 invasion is worth a great deal more since it turned white territory into black territory.    See variation for a point comparison
It is black who ends up defening after the aggresive looking R12 move.  White is forcing again.
Now the 3x3 is gone.  Now it is a contest of upper right vs lower left.  It is not a lost game, but it is balanced now.  This is bad news for black, as either white has rank advantage or komi advantage, so the game won't go in black's direction very easily.
White would do better here to play solidly.  See variation.  White is generous to black here.
Marco:  Looking at it again i'm not happy how the corner went, but not sure what might be better plays there.  Andrew:  Well the 3x3 invasion doesn't work there with E3.  White has one stone too many for black to make life.  after J3, black reallt needed to check to see if the 3x3 was a good move.  Here it looks like black was caught by surprise, and in desperation, tried the immpossible.
wB8 sure seems like an interesting fight for white.  He has little to lose, while black has two groups there that could be negatively affected.    White kindaly lets black off the hook though.
See variation for a better move to secure black's group.
This is a little too late.
Marco:  Looks like a big blunder to me now to run and give up the corner, but i was afraid of white building a big moyo when playing at that point. Alternate i was thinking about A to secure the corner but with white building such a big moyo that equalizes my upper right corner i felt like i have nothing compared to the pretty big white corner in the upper left.   Andrew:  Since white can cut at P3, this is not so great.  Black can probably live with O6 even if it is cut off, so this is not bad.  White is giving black a chance here.  O2 seems too small.
I think this is overly cautious, though I have not read iot all out to see if white can live.  It seems unlikely he needs P7 to live, especially since black can be cut at P3.
This is reckless if you recognize the cut at P3.  The coming fight around here could also interact with B8, and let white get the kill, or get a huge sente move out of it.  Black should be more cautious here with so much potential interactions.
why not cut?
Why not connect?
not sure of black's aim here.  standard moves like s6 seem better.
Black gives up sente here, and I am not sure why.  If F9 were a black stone, then G14 would make sense.  As it is black wastes a move protecting the neutral area just below F14.
Oh good, white gives up sente too.
This is at least worth a point for black, and kinda sente.  There are bigger things to do though, so white might even be able to ignore, and make the attack on the lower right instead.  Black will certainly answer an attack on Q3
Now black really loses sente, and the gains are nearly non-existant.  Black has not secured much territory at all.  Black needs another move before the E13 area can turn into points.
A nice sente move.  White takes point while securing the R10 group.  White is preparing to attack Q3.
Black needn't run, as he can still live there.  See variations for some of the possibilities.
Marco:  Wanted to strengthen my connection with the weak black group here. Thought also about A but didnt want to end up cut off from the top with the big weak group in the lower right.  Andrew: This move doesn't gain black much.  It would be better unplayed as it solidifies white, and perhaps later playing at F10 and cutting would be possible.
Marco:  Not sure what i thought here, probably nothing or even less ;-)  Would see it better at A or somewhere else now  Andrew: I think the aim is the small little bubble you might make with H8, M 8 etc, but it is hard to make that happen here.  A is likely better.
K5 is now a donation.  Though K7 is now a senteish move that builds a small center bubble for you.
This is an over play.  B8 is needed befroe black can attack around here.
Now K7 is gone now too :(
Think sente.  see variation
Just guard unless you have something nice.  Black really can't do much to G10 etc.  See variation  Now think back to G10, and how much looser white would be here if you hadn't played it.
Is this really needed?  Don't give up sente so easily.
Let white run up here.  you don't mind since you are so strong in that direction.  You do not want to give white more access to the sides.  See variaion
D10 lost you these two points.
This is also a good point.  D16 has been sitting there the whole time, and it is very clearly sente for you.  At the very least it is worth one point, and you can almost guarantee that white will respond.  You can then do whatever other move you were thinking about.
Can you really cut?
Thought about playing A and have no idea now why i didnt play it :-/  Andrew :(
Thought i could make something of the cut at A but with the upper white group already linked up to the corner i was unable to find something handy here.
where ya going black?  sure seems dead in there.  See variation for a better use of the R2 stone.
The shape makes me cry.
DavidB [4k]: Hope you enjoy the game daniel17 [5k]: hi
J: I think this is wrong side. C16 and J17 are both low and also nearer to each other than J17 and Q16. When you approach with a solitary stone, it is very weak. Therefore you should also approach opponent's weaker point, instead of the stronger side. R14 would have been better, I think.  On another notice, both D13 and D4 are now high, which does not create a good balance on the left side.  Moreover, when you approach a stone on (3, 4) point (such as C16), you should always approach from the open side, not "from behind". That is, if your opponent would approach your R4, it would be better to come from the left side than from above. Now you essentially force your opponent to play in E16, which is a perfect corner closure for him - a move he would have loved to play anyway.  See variation.
J: Here you see. Your opponent's stones in upper left corner are perfectly balanced, while your D13 stone looks alone and weak facing a strong black formation.
J: You need this stone to help D13, but as pointed out, it was D13 that caused all the trouble.
J: This should be low. Now all your stones in the bottom side are high, which is not a good balance. L3 would have created a very nice balance with R4 and D4.
J: This is small. You secure the corner, but both your sides (left and bottom) are still wide open for an invasion. Better wait and see where the opponent goes. When the invasion comes, you can secure the other one of them. See variations.
DavidB [4k]: here, I thought it was more or less still equal  J: It looks more or less equal in terms of moyo size, but if you compare positions, you'll see that black is in a better position.   Black upper left corner is very good in terms of relative positions of the stones (C16, E16 and J17). Your D13 and C10 stones are very weak compared to them and a single stone at C12 or somewhere around the formation would instantly give them problems.  Black R7 and Q10 form a very nice balance with Q16 (R17 was not the best possible move, but let's ignore that for now) and are facing your weak R4 stone. If black plays around P4, your R4 would immediately be in trouble. While you're making small life in the corner, black could get a strong position facing L4, which he could later use into his advantage.  All in all, you have only two options for invasion (around N17 and Q13) and both are in the middle of stronger black positions. Invasion in either of these would make you run and give black an easy task to secure a lot of territory and close the other invasion point.  On the other hand, if you consider your own positions, there is an invasion point around D7 and basically the whole bottom side is open. Your stones are much weaker in terms of position, which usually will result in your opponent's favor, when later in the game you convert your moyo to territory. Your opponent can extend from strong positions and secure territory at the same time. You'll constantly be defending running from place to place defending your territory. In this kind of situation the one who's doing the attacking will usually win.  You should always try to create strong shapes. Extending/attacking from strong shapes is always more effective than from weak shapes. When you have a strong formation behind you, you don't need to worry about the escape route. When you are attacking from a weak position, you can not go ahead at full steam as you constantly need to worry about your back as well.
J: Here you see another problem of a weak shape. You have to play this slow move to strengthen your lower part's weak position. Had the position been strong, you could have extended from it instead of making this repairing move.
DavidB [4k]: looks too high, but I don't know how to punish and when DavidB [4k]: possible better moves?  J: Your comment on "don't know how to punish and when" illustrates the whole problem. If cou consider the position, you can see that your D13 and C10 stones are starting to look very lonely and ineffective under such a formidable black formation. There's no way you can mount a serious attack from such position. On the other hand you'll start to feel that they'll need help sooner rather than later.  Black can play this kind of big move (which looks too high) exactly because his positions are very strong. No need to fear being cut off from the rest of the stones. I feel this is not the best move for black, though. He has stronger position than you, so he should put more pressure on your weak spots and get more territory that way.
DavidB [4k]: too slow again...  J: Yes. But as I said in the move before this, your D13 and C10 started to feel lonely. Perhaps you felt it too and played here. Another sign of weak position.
DavidB [4k]: pathetic DavidB [4k]: now I'm lost as to what to do.  J: In this kind of situation (when you're already behind and the opponent makes an invasion) you cannot let the invasion be successful, otherwise you're certainly going to lose. It is difficult to see how you could kill the invasion, but at least you have to make your opponent run and try to build territory and/or influence at the same time. When you decide from which side to attack, always play away from thickness. Your left side is already strong, while right side (L4, P3 and R4) are rather weak. Now you leave black an easy task of getting out or playing a stone somewhere around N3 to split your stones.  It would be better to attack from the right, as this would push the lone black stone against your strong wall. There's no room to maneuvre there, which will give you much better chance to attack the stone, because (1) your opponent has less room to go and (2) you don't need to strengthen that side anymore. You can concentrating on pushing your opponent, without worrying about will the left side hold.
J: Here you see one effect of the weak right side. Your opponent is in the middle of your stones, but he's in no hurry to try to get out. Instead he goes deeper. Moreover, in this position it is easy to see that F4 is in a bad position. (1) It does not attack J3 properly (there's still room under it), (2) It does not create almost any territory, (3) it strengthens a position that was already strong and (4) pushes your opponent towards your weak position. If black had played N3 (or something like that), that would certainly been rather irritating from your point of view.
J: This is better. Take away living room from black and strengthen your weak position. A dual-purpose stone is always good.
J: This does not give you much. Your left side is too weak and too far for this to secure any territory. Black can live low, which is what he decided to do anyway. You should opt for making him run, while still possible.
J: Too thin. Your stone extends from a thin position a long way towards a stronger black position. Can easily be cut off or exploited.
J: Here you can see the effect of weak and strong position. When you divided the middle part, you played along 'H' line, while your opponent came all the way to 'K'. Granted, there's room for invasion in black's position, but there's room for invasion in your position as well. From strong position it is easy to extend farther without getting a feeling of stretching too thin.
J: Here the game is more or less over. Black can secure a victory easily by playing safe from now on.  All in all I think the biggest mistake in your fuseki is playing weak shapes and letting (sometimes even forcing) your opponent to play strong shapes. After fuseki if your positions are weak compared to your opponent it is very, very difficult to win against an even opponent. Even though the moyo looks like the same in terms of size, the result is probably not going to be good. You have to constantly defend your territory (not getting more, probably losing some), while your opponent is constantly mounting attacks against you (not losing territory, probably gaining some). If all the small points go against you, you're going to lose in the end. Strong positions, strong shapes are the answer.
DavidB [4k]: O12 was nice reading
DavidB [4k]: Thank you for the game daniel17 [5k]: thx DavidB [4k]: nicely done
Shedal: after this B move, you should think about the right moment for invasion in the TR corner. I think, the best point is at [A]. See variation to the next move.
Shedal: Strange move by B.  This move is usually bad unless there is some potentlal for B moyo on the left, which is not the case here.
Shedal: this move is not joseki, although it seems appropriate here due to presence of the marked stone. See var.
Shedal: [A] would be more common. If you don't like forcing B moves like [B], you could move at [B] or [C] yourself. The move in the game is too close to other stones in the corner.
P: Not sure this was the best move, but I wanted to limit black's development while starting to build some territory.  Shedal: this move is OK
Shedal: another strange move by B.
Shedal: right.
Shedal: pros always seem to play as in variation - this is more light and powerful technique
Shedal: this move ends in gote if B plays at [A]. B don't even need to answer it, he could just connect with his left group. That is, the direction is wrong. You won't mind if your opponent makes eyes in gote, so you should put pressure on the weak group while making sure territory, then take sente to get a big point (B, for example).  See variation.
P: I hesitated before playing this move, but I felt I had to extend while trying to seal the black group in the corner.  Shedal: a move around [A] is still urgent to separate 2 black groups and possibly continue the attack.
P: this seems like a mistake from black.  Shedal: this move itself is not a mistake since it could be treated as kikashi if leaved as it is. Although the standard kikashi is one line higher.
P: black has a weak group  Shedal: now B is running out which is somewhat pointless. He didn't achieve any useful result but helped W instead. The 2 B stones were light and could be sacrificed easily.
P: Attacking while making profit?  Shedal: I think the direction is wrong again ;-) The profit isn't any big. You can attack on a larger scale. See var.
Shedal: a bad move. Never push through if you cannot cut. This only reduces your own liberties.
Shedal: still, A seems better for me.
P: I could not make this work  Shedal: if you want to reduce you could [A]. This was also a good moment to stop and count the score.  W has: 18 points in the top left 7 points in the right side 19 points in the bottom left 12 points at the bottom komi 6.5 Summary, W has more than 60 points  B has: 12 points in the lower right 28 points in the top 9 points in the left side Summary, B has less than 50 points  Since W has a safe lead and sente, he could easily win by making reducing/defencing moves like [A], [B], [C], maybe [D]
P: looking back I should have protected my bottom left corner. Shedal: yes, it is the way bigger.
Shedal: This is an interesting life and death problem, but it seems like B is unconditionally alive here :( See variation to the next move.
Shedal: you should be careful when making this move. B may be not so passive as in the game... See var.
P: A bad move on my part. A move at A (E7) would have been a better attack point I believe.  Shedal: you cannot attack this B group with [A], because it would be unconditionally alive in that case See var. to the next move.
P: Again very bad, playing at A (E8) would have been better I think  Shedal: indeed, this move does not achieve anything. If you want attack black, first of all you need the move at [C]. Otherwise, B could connect with ko starting at [D]. See variations.
Shedal: Now B's position is steady and hardly attackable.
Shedal: bad shape. After this move, B could [A] (see var.), getting many yose points in sente. Yose is starting at this moment, so both sides must concentrate on getting points. Center does not have potential for that, so to take points on the side (with [B]) is better.
Shedal: [A] seems like a better defence for me. Sente is bigger than the marked stone.
Shedal: 1-point move by B.
Shedal: see variations.
P: I was happy to get these endgame moves all in sente.
P: I did not read this out to well, too greedy, one move to the left would have probably been better. Shedal: maybe just [A]?
P: Black resigned since white seems ahead by at least 10 points.   Shedal: There was no big mistakes in the game. Making shape and attacking also were not game-deciding skills.  I think the biggest problem (for both sides) is understanding the situation as a whole. Score estimation is very helpful in the middlegame. I advice that you read Cho Chikun's "Positional Judgment".  Good luck in your way of Go :)
This is an interesting opening. Typically, if you had played a C16, you would play at A, to maintain symmetry. B, possibly C could work as well.  Another opening style could be to play at E or D.  Regardless, playing on opposite corners like you did encourages a game with lots of fighting, as you saw. If you wish to have less fights, play on E or D. But I won't go into too much depth on opening theory; you can read about that more on Sensei's Library if you wish.
This move shows that he wants to start fighting immediately
This was an interesting reponse to his move. Depending on how "in your face" you wish to be, you should have played at A,B, C, D or E, with A being the most violent.  The problem I see with your move is that it is so early in the game and you are playing locally without making much gains. You might make gains later by winning the fight, but this may or may not happen. Playing in one of the labeled spots responds to white by solidifying your position, while at the same time grabbing territory for you.  Another way to view the situation is using the circles and squares. You are starting to form a moyo, or wall, with your stones. This will give you strength and control towards the center of the board, to the left of the circles. White is beginning to form his moyo to the right of the squares, toward the edges. When going to the edges like that, white is going for guranteed points/territory. Your moves instead are going to give you strength when you want to fight in the center, but no immediate points.  There is a balance between playing for territory and playing for influence. I recommend that you google and look for some articles on this. Here is one of sensei's articles that you might find helpful. http://senseis.xmp.net/?TerritoryVersusInfluenceStyles
This further defines the moyos that I talked about in move 5.
I think you are playing too much locally at this point. Think of it is as penny-wise, pound-foolish. If your opponent had chosen to ignore this corner somewhat, he could have made large gains in the D4 corner.  A better move would have been to do something in the D4 corner, since no one has moved there yet.  You may say that you have to respond to white's move there right now, but this isn't the case. There is plenty of time to develop in the bottom right. If white keeps moving there to the point that your stones are in danger, you will have had enough time to move in the other areas of the board so that for every point that white made from playing in the bottom right, you will have made 2 or more points.
Interesting.. I would not have expected this move. It doesn't really stick with the whole moyo concept.
I'll mention again, I feel that both of you are neglecting other areas of the board in an attempt to just destroy each ther right now. The problem is, you don't develop much territory, so basically the games hinges on who wins this one fight, which is a very large gamble.  Overall though, you are winning the fight at this point. White is disconnected, where as you are very connected and can become even more so when you capture the 3 white stones with S3.
not certain if this move was necessary.  It wasn't. If you look at the sequences below, it might be difficult to save those stones, but it is do-able if you take some time to read out the sequence. That being said, it's always good to play it safe sometimes, especially when a large part of your winning this fight is based off whether or not you can capture those 3 stones and that your 3 stones don't get capture.  If you hadn't played that move, later on, white would have tried to exploit the fact that those three stones were a little bit weaker. So while it might not have been necessary right then, I think it was the right move in the long run.
See, white grabs the corner finally ;)
Playing at A would have been an interesting option to explore. This gives you a stronger shape than your move did. Look at the squares to see what kind of shape I'm talking about. Your move leaves room to come underneath and undermine the entire foundation, but A closes that off.  If you wanted to play a little bit slower, then joseki suggests that you play at B.  Since white made the 4-4 move in both corners, you should respond in whatever way that would make your 3-4 move in the corner stronger.  I suggest that in the future, you play at A.  Read up about 3-4 points in Sensei's library some to learn more.
I'm just going to say now, I don't like this move. In the territory/influence balance, this is WAY too heavy on influence. It doesnt accentuate your 3-4 point at all.  Essentially, it gives you no actual points; to get value from this stone, you will have to fight for it. I would still prefer A, but B would also be preferable to this.
Bad move by white. This really establishes nothing, other than possibly preventing ladder attacks.
was this an appropriate way to handle his stone? should I have even worried?  It was an OK response, but there were definately better choices. You could have attacked the Q9 group of white stones by playing at R17 and undermiming the white corner.   I think the response was too close to the white stone. It's still early, you should be playing farther back, since white didn't initiate a direct fight with this stone. Playing at or around A and B would have been good because it pressures the white stone while at the same time giving you lots more strength
playing at A would be best because it starts to connect and make use of your C16 stone.  B is very conservative, but it will help give you a platform to either attack Q16 or connect back to C16.
I prefer A, but your move was good too, since your starting to make a moyo.
As you saw in the next move, this makes you vulnerable. You don't have enough nearby strength to disconnect from your other stones. A is the best, local move, but B or D, and possibly even C, would be better, because they pressure the white stones.  This pressure happens because they now have fewer places to run to and make eyes. Instead, they will be forced to fight in the middle to make their eyes, which is much harder than making an eye at the side.
This move only works because it's in the center. Otherwise you would have been in danger very quickly.
Good. Gives black lots of strength to develop from.
This stone is too high to stop white's growth. At this point, A or B will try to save a few points and grab some territory.  C would also grab some good land.
Bad move white. Playing on the 3rd line would have been better.
Good response, but watch out for monkey jump.
I don't like this. Where are you running too? You have no stones in that area. Playing at A would help your stones connect and make them stronger.
Weak cut. You can't make much happen with it. You would be better served by strengthening your own position.
There is a cut at A for white, as you found out.
the fight to kill the four stones started by this contact I figured would go pretty favorably for me, can you help with ways I could've sealed this up easier?  You're trying to hard. Let white have his 4 stones for now, make sure that your stones are alive before you try to kill his. A or B would be good because you can gain strength from your nearby stones. Your move split the difference and ended up giving white two directions to run in and didn't give you any help from your other stones.
No... Your G6 stone is too weak right now. Play at G7 to make it live. True, white will get away, but you will contain him and he won't kill your stones.
Again, you have a hard time keeping this stone alive because white can use his stones to effectively pressure you, but your stones can't really help much.
this should've been c8.  C8? I disagree. That is too conservative. E8 would be good though. BUT, F3 would be best, since it would not only kill white, but make your bottom group incredibly strong.
you know they're dead already, why not use F3 to connect your stones and force the move he was going to take anyways?
No... These stones are dead, protect what you have already.
Q17 would be ok too.
This move takes advantage of how you played for influence instead of territory.
No...
They're dead, don't bother.
No. Protect your territory. Let white connect if he wants to. You don't have the strenght in this area to take over these stones.
Just forces white to expand inside your area.
No room for black to make eyes quickly. Only hope is to kill L18 group.
Over-extension. White is too close and you have nowhere to run really.
Unnecessary. I know your trying to pressure L12, but it's alive. Instead, O12 would be good since you might connect somewhere.
No! This gives sente to white. You didn't need to connect yet.
White ignores this move. It doesn't do anything.
this fight was a disaster. i'm not sure why I never took the 3 stones at r7. was there anything else that could've been done?  This fight isn't over yet. Extending to S9 would be best, because you'd be guaranteed to live.  In general though, this result came from not setting up very well on the perimeters, which white exploited.
Ladder. Don't bother trying to escape.
Over-extension. Your vulnerable to a chain of captures, as you saw.
T12 is dead, you can't save it. But you can save S11 and S10.
Wrong... Exact same sequence from 2 moves ago.  Take at T6.
Unnecessary yet.
Good!
Too far in.
this move should've been at g19, right?
Why force white to move if it doesn't help you any?
You got lucky that you could save these.
Not necessary.
I> If you want to improve your skills at go, try to play in a more traditional way: secure corners first then sides. The first move by White allowed you to secure UR corner in a handful of ways, see variations. This and the following moves by Black indicate a wish to surround the very first White stone and White group. But the game of go isn't about surrounding only. It is about balance.
teachme [17k]: where are you from HsHyun [22k]: california  I> ... leaving Q13 to be killed.
teachme [17k]: i fromgermany  I> You are trying to save a hopeless stone. Again, at this stage of the game, you should pay more attention to strategy, i. e. defining your (future) sphere of influence.
I> A wasted opportunity. See variations.
I> This is also a very reckless attempt to threaten the invincible White group. Most obviously, this Black stone is cut at O12. Locally, a better move was R16.
I> Q17 would be a good shape move.
I> Threatening R16 gives absolutely nothing, Notice how weak are your stones Q16, R17 and pathetic S16 compared with the solid White formation.
I> White didn't even pay attention to your atari, and preferred an intrusion to the upper side of the board.
I> Again, pointless (worth 1 point, to be precise). Nothing threatened, nothing fortified, nothing expanded.
I> White siwtched for territory here from the UR corner.
I> You are playing from the top. This gives you influence but no territory. To exploit influence, you must be a skilled player. If not, then playing for territory is much more secure.
D14 is the book move (joseki).
I> ...leaving the weak D13 stone. Now White has a lot of opportunities to secure the left side. See variations
I> Better was another move, see variation
I> D10 is very important now, since three Black stones D11-13 are threatened.
I> A horrible intrusion!
I> A very cautious move, F8 is better
I> The game ends here. I wouldn't say it's lost for Black. However, if we take a look at the board we'll see that White formations are much stronger than weak, scattered Black ones. Notice that both White "armies" have a solid ground at the left and right edges of the board. White still can easily invade the bottom, as well as UL and the top.  *Notice* You asked about Life and Death. As for that, nothing tricky has appeared in this game. Simply playing more games will make you understand the basic Life and Death.
[EV] This is not joseki and looks unreasonable for W.  Ishida's joseki dictionary says the hane at E2 is the only move for W.  Did you maybe confuse this with the joseki which has the same pattern but with W to play?
[EV] This result is clearly good for B.
[EV] Vital shape point, but I like the simple C9 even better, leaving W without eye space.
[EV] W is already fairly secure, and B could easily become overconcentrated here, so B could consider taking sente for a large play elsewhere.
[EV] I would take one of the many large points on the outside before invading here, but that may be just a matter of style.
[EV] This move seems too cramped for B.  After giving W a large corner, it is unclear he can get much from an attack on the lone W stone, which still has room for a two-space extension.
[EV] W has already secured a large corner, so there no need to press more, simply extend to R13.  The exchange of this move for the next B move hurts the weak W stone on the side and will end up mostly wasted if B gets to extend around L3 before W.
[EV] R13 would also be fine.
After this move I regret my attachment in the first place
I have no idea how to handle my 3 stones now.  [EV] They were forcing stones, so you can treat them lightly.
[EV] Blocking like this when you cannot prevent a break-through is usually bad, but here it seems to turn out OK.  I think just jumping out to N10 (preparing P12) would also be good.
I guess n7 is better?  [EV] Yes, I think a move in the center is better, N7 or M6 or simply N10.  B cannot connect underneath, and W is still too thin here to be concerned with constricting B eye space in preparation for a kill.
[EV] A little greedy.  Connecting around L5 (to defend against J6) would leave B in the lead I think.
Don't ask :)
[EV] How about changing the order a little and playing E4 first?  But the B side is broken in any case.
[EV] Nice.
[EV] B still cannot play here, so this move is not absolutely needed.  Still, after the big gain in the corner, W is now in the lead.
[EV] It looks like you will have to give up six stones this way, which is not bad since you get compensating thickness.  You could also consider attaching at P12 and fighting.  I have no idea how that fight would turn out :)
I was pretty confident I would win now. Then again... my judgement is really scrappy at the moment :)  [EV] Yes, W is ahead now.  Nothing happened after this to change the course of the game, so my comments end here.
I felt clever here.... :P
I didn't feel clever here....
hmm.... trying to be clever is not good for me always.... =/
Jon:  When playing white, it's important to watch which direction you place a 3-4 stone in the corner when black has 4-4 stones in play.  You don't want to give black an ideal approach move from his 4-4 stone, but that's what happened here.
Jon:  A good move, this is an ideal approach from black's top right corner at A.
Jon:  It's harder to attack black with his ideal setup, but this pincer feels too loose, it allows black's pincered stone to move out easily and counterattack.  What would be a better way to pincer?
Jon:  The correct plan, black will have a comfortable time counterattacking white's pincer stone.
Jon:  Too early!   When you're counterattacking a two point pincer, you need to build more strength first before launching the counterattack.
Sebastian:  This seemed to be the natural move.  Jon:  While it may seem natural, black's shape in relation to the marked stones is very thin, so I'm  concerned about that.  I'd prefer to move out more carefully.
Jon:  As black, this attachment now worries me with the thin shape of the marked stones.
Sebastian:  I misread the ladder here - there is no ladder >_<  Jon: ><   I provided another route to consider in the variation.
Sebastian:  Black is surprised - there is no ladder >_< Very very stupid. Should i resign?  Jon:  Nah, the game's still perfectly playable, so you can safely continue.
Jon:  Because white has a lot of strength above, I would prefer to play more defensively (i.e. play with the aim of getting a base) and use a low approach.
Sebastian:  I thought that i need to play unusual moves to be able to win. I wanted to play the A sequence soon and try to build a big right side.  Jon:  You don't really need to play too unusually, the game's not that far gone yet.  As for this move, I'd prefer to use something else, the marked stones will make the stone at B harder to counterattack, so I don't think black'll be able to get a good result here.
Sebastian:  I was happy with this result. Black is behind, but he has potential.  Jon:  Hum...  I'm not really happy with this for black, as he's now forced to stabilize this group, but he won't be able to get much from it due to white's strength above.
Sebastian:  Is this a good move for white?  Jon:  Definitely, this is perfectly fine.
Sebastian:  I needed to play agressive. I considered G12 to be helpful in the fight.  Jon:  This is a dangerous overplay though, as it forces white to separate your groups.  As for the G-12 stones, they need to be closer to be of more assistance.  There's also white's marked stones, which are pivotal here.
Sebastian:  This was odd. i expected white to play at A.  Jon:  This is very odd, but also extremely submissive, so the kosumi at A is a must.
Sebastian:  Black's center looks promising. The game becomes even again, i think.  Jon:  Black *is* getting nice influence in the center, but because it's still very loose and open, it's hard to know how much you'll actually get right now.
Jon:  Another small move.  White really needs to get to the right side.
Sebastian:  Is this move slow?  Jon:  Yeah, I'd want to get to the right side with A now.
Jon:  A good decision, you have better prospects on the bottom.
Sebastian:  My idea was to make white overconcentrated on the top. The lower right quadrant of the board seemed bigger.  Jon:  You have a good idea, but I'm very worried about white's natural response of A next.  He can shut the top right corner in and try to make a big chunk of points on the top with his marked wall.  With this in mind, I'd prefer to keep the game simple and move out at A myself.
Sebastian:  This was weird. Overplay?  Jon:  It looks weird at first, but saving the two marked white stones on their own would be too much of a pain, so this way white can threaten to take a simple base in the corner with the 3-3 invasion or cap the black stone with A.
Sebastian:  Now the game seems to be fine for black. Is this move good? How about black A instead?  Jon:  I love the solidity of this move, but because white's marked stones aren't going anywhere fast, I'd prefer to go for black A.
Jon:  You can really see the difference between who gets to this area first.
Jon:  An overplay, white must connect.
Jon:  White says "Ow!"
Jon:  This feels submissive, black can safely block at A.
Jon:  It's going to be a tough fight for white.
Jon:  I'd prefer to give up this stone and try to attack from the outside.
Jon:  White has the right idea, but I feel making the atari at A directly will leave white with a stronger group.
Sebastian:  I think black missed this move.  Jon:  You mean white?  Probably, and it's going to make things more complicated for white.
Sebastian:  I think this is good enough for black.  Jon:  Looks good.  The last piece in this puzzle will be to get the turn at A.
I played here to see how white answers. If white plays n18, black will try to split white's groups.
Sebastian:  I misread here. I did not see that white can play at A.  Jon:  Yeah, I'd want to extend at B instead.
Sebastian:  I decided to start endgame soon.  Jon:  That's reasonable,
I think this is bigger than A. Black aims at B + C.  Jon:  Agreed.   You also want to try and get D too.
Jon:  To keep it simple, I'd prefer to extend straight down at A.  This way you can threaten B later, but it also weakens the bad aji white would have with the hane/wedge at C.
i dont remember the subsequent moves. It became a giant tsumego. There was a very big fight, black lived at A, died at B and killed C o_O  Jon:  Wow!  XD  Killing C doesn't surprise me as much, black can really smush that thing, but living at A, sounds like the rest of the game was exciting!
should i have played A or B instead of R17?  csh: R17 is a fine move. It threatens to play at B if White does not protect. If you play at B right now, there isn't much of an attack on the upper half of the white group. White can play R17 and live.
I should have gone to the left side i think, but which one should i play A or B  csh: I like approaching the corner better than the splitting move. See the variation.
csh: The problem with this extension is that it does not secure territory at the top. The area there can still be invaded and split up. White also gets sente, and will secure the upper left.
csh: White gets a good move which almost secures the entire corner. This is a really big move.
csh: From here, the black stones can come under attack. Plays at A and B can connect to the surrounding white stones.
csh: This move almost secures the lower left corner for White. Black is falling behind.
csh: This move isn't ambitious enough. An extension to A might be better.
csh: Playing this move allows White to live in the corner with A.
should i have played this instead of M4?  If yes what should i do next?
csh: This move is a mistake. It is attaching to his weak stone, and "forcing" him to strengthen his position.
csh: After trading these six moves, the white group is pretty stable.
csh: After trading the marked stones, the white group is much stronger than it was before, and much harder to attack. It's near impossible to keep White contained and prevent him from connecting out.
csh: You are protecting the cut here, but it's also a slow move. Since you are behind, you need to play moves that increase your territory to get back in the game. Merely solidly connecting your groups will not create enough territory to win.  It is also much more important to secure the group in the right corner. If your group is cut in half, you can still run the groups out and connect to safety. If you do not protect the corner group, it will have nowhere to run. The white stones are blocking the exit.
csh: This is an odd direction to play, in my opinion. White can just uproot the black group and then chase it to the center and win the game.
csh: The corner group isn't killable. It's more important now to make sure the outside group lives.
Game over black lost all his territory  csh: I agree. This would be tough to come back. You could try a probe in the upper left (earlier in the game) and an invasion in the lower left to see if you can get back into the game, but it would be rough.  You still have to worry about White playing at A, too.  I think it might be better to think about trying to maintain a balance in the opening, and not to fall so far behind. It's a lot harder to come back after a weak opening, because it requires invasions and desparate measures to try and even out the game. Try to think about the potential territory you are creating, as well as judging the potential territory of your opponent.  Instead of playing "protective" moves, like the marked stone, try to expand your possible territory before concentrating on solidifying it.  I hope you find this commentary useful. Please let me know if you have any questions.
I know a lot of players play right on the dot D16 but I always play one below it, this shouldn't be a problem right?  Paul: There's nothing wrong with this move.  Although, personally I'd put it around d3 or c4.  If black chooses to play d4 or c3, you have one of those strange diagonal fighting games.  Supposedly, before they introduced komi some thousand years ago, nobody ever played on the hoshi (4-4) during fuseki (the opening).  They always played komoku (3-4).  In even games, komoku is just as good as the star point, but they do different things.  The 4-4 point doesn't secure any territory, it's only purpose is influence.  The 3-3 point is the other extreme -- it instantly seals the corner, but has no influence and the 3-4 point is half of each.
I thought it was kind of weird that black played in the top right and bottom left, isn't it normal to play either both stones on the right or both of them on the left?  Paul: As I mentioned back at move 2, the diagonal game is all fighting.  Some people really like fighting games and they go for the opposite corner game.  In a game like this it's difficult to make a moyo and you usually have to fight for everything.
I actually don't really know why I did this move, it's just that I've heard it's the best possible move to do when you're attacked  like I played S4, black attacks P4, so I would counter with N3 right?  Paul: I'm not sure there's any one best move for any single corner position.  It really depends on what's near by and what your goals are.  Certainly N3 is playable (N4 may be also), but so might Q6 or Q7.  Any way you work it out, you're going to be fighting because of the influence from D4 and Q16.  If you had a white stone at Q13, I'd say Q6 or A7 are far better than N3.  Because you don't want black to form a moyo that's bigger than any moyo you can make, it really might be best to pincer the *approaching* move of P4.  In my opinion, it really can't be said to be an *attack* here, it's just an approach.  The reason I feel it's not an attack is that I don't think black can reasonably expect to *kill* the R4 stone even if you tenuki after the approach -- although he could possibly force you to live very small in the corner if you don't respond.
I was trying to take the bottom middle part of the map  Was K4 the wrong move? should I have gone instead to M5?  Paul: Well, that bottom middle part is hard to get, at least in a way that gives you lots of points. The reason is because of the influence from D4, which you see on move 11.  Personally, I think I would have gone for L3 so I could either follow up L6 or with an approach of my own at F3.  (See the variations.)  Although, no matter how it turns out in the middle there, you're still weakening the R4 stone because you're allowing black to build thickness on top of it.  It may become quite hard to live in that corner or even flee later.  Fleeing will inevitably run into that Q16 stone or extensions from it.
I think  that whenever a player plays on the star D4 that the best way to attack is to play C3, is this correct?  Paul: Again, it always depends what's around.  It's true that a 3-3 invasion can always live under a 4-4 stone (with few black stones nearby anyway); but it's rarely a good idea.  It nearly always leads to a silly 8 point corner while black gets so much outside thickness that it's not an even trade.  We can see here that black is intentionally violent, hence their diagonal game, no sense giving them all that thickness to use attacking you all over the board.  Of course, *using* thickness is a hard thing to do well, but it's definitely not a fair trade.
I was going for the bottom of the board so I played D2, I probally should have gone B5 correct?  Paul: I'm not enitrely sure on the ordering of this Joseki.  I think d2 is ok.  I know black makes an error later, but I'm not sure how to punish it.  It seems you make a bigger error anyway.
(Paul: see variation.)
(Paul: pretty sure this is an overplay... I believe, since black has so many cutting points, you can play on top.)
This move now that I think about it probally was a mistake, I should have gone B4 instead of A7 right?  Paul: No, think bigger.  See the variation.  When people deviate from joseki, there's usually some cool things you can do to punish them.  It's a bad idea to memorize joseki, but I think it's pretty clear here why black is supposed to push at c7.
This move pretty much killed all my stones bottom left, now that I've seen it I'll try not to make the same mistake  Paul: Definitely watch out for shapes with only two liberties left.  But connecting was the real mistake.  I think you had other optoins -- see vairations.
Paul: when you realize your stones are dead... unless you can immediately find some beinifit from playing nearby, don't touch them.  They're worth a lot as Aji.  You can use them later during a ko fight or to build something else that hasn't even developed yet.  If you force your opponent to capture them, then you effectively cannot use them for *anything* useful.  Save them for later.  Save them.    Although, here, I think you can immediately use them to live in the corner.  Oh, it appears no.  This corner is hopeless.  It's better to leave this stuff behind in case it comes in helpful later on.  See if you can build something bigger instead.  There's a 10 point move at C15, you could try to link your lower right corner together with your middle stones at P3 (huge fight) or Q2 (might work, dunno), but there's little to gain from B8.
Paul: The B9 group isn't worth much, but now the M4 group has lost it's only possible eye -- it helps to have an eye when you're running -- and there's less chance of connecting under the black stones.
Paul: probably L2 would be better at M3, L3, or L6 (running).  Touching (tsuke) the enemy generally means you have to give something up, since you start the capture race at a disadvantage.
I was wondering whether to play M3 or K3, since I thought he was going to cut my formation apart I decided to go M3 and I think maybe it was a mistake
not really sure how to avoid this move because he would have cut me at M3 anyways if I didn't play there.  Paul: Again, I think the mistake was playing on the left (making the B9 group) when you had a chance to try to do something with these stones before.  They weren't set up to withstand attack and you helped black build the thickness (triangles) pointed at your formation.  The attack was the next logical step for black because of it.
Paul: This is probably the single worst way to deal with the Q16 stone.  It already has a lot of influence.  You're only likely to give it more by living small underneath it.
not sure why my opponent ignored my attack R17, maybe I shouldn't have played there?  Paul: It really isn't an attack.  There's no way to kill the black stone and it's effects (influence) are still intact.  Personally, I think the black move at Q2 would work better at Q6.  Allowing you to live small in the corner while getting outside thickness could be a huge advantage for black.  See variation.
should I have gone L5 instead of N6?  Paul: possibly.  Then you might be able to flee more effectively.  The situation for whie here is grim no matter how you work it out.  But it's clear white can only run away.  There's no eyes to be made here.
Paul: Still no weyes, and you need two of them.  I think black has the idea right: use thickness to murder enemy.
Paul: I believe this is a mistake.  See variation.
Paul: This move is a little slow.  So was Q6.  I think O3 still helps you live in the middle -- could be wrong.  But R5 is a little slow.
Paul: This was a mistake for black.  He could have killed you at N1.  O3 was the move (if there was one).
I managed to make my stones at the bottom of the board survive, but I still have no idea how he managed to surround me like that, was there any way for me to have fought back?  Paul: Yes.  But I think I covered it before.  It was much earlier.
I thought I could make bottom left live but it didn't work out in the end.  Paul: Yeah, I looked at this earlier in the review.  I don't think there's enough room to live.  Even when you had the Aji of the B6 group, it was still too tight, but it's probably impossible now.
was this too greedy of me? should I have played Q8 instead of Q10?  Paul: No, Q10 is way too slow.  In fact, I think your Q8 move should have been even further out ... even greedier.  Perhaps R14 (threating to use your R16 stone) or Q14.  He can still maybe slide under your wall-like-formation, but you might just build some thickness during the conflict.
this move killed all my stones right? I probally should have played there before trying to take more territory with Q10  Paul: well, the peep may kill some of them.  It might be better to give up the O6 stones and try to keep the R5 stones.  I think the mistake was at N8 or there abouts...  I don't think that move helped.  See the variation at move 84.
again, he killed the chance to make the 2 eyes, I prob should have played this spot sooner.
I was trying to at least claim the right side of the board but he managed to stop m again somehow...
Paul: This was a little slow.  It's probably better to try to run as fast as you can that try to stay connected when you're getting surrounded.  Even if you lose a few stones, you might gain something.  Although, I think here black has spread himself a little to thinly in his violent attempts to kill you -- I believe it should have backfired.
I was trying to get rid of the black stones and maybe survive on the right side.
I couldn't think of any way to make my stones live so I was going to at least try for upper right corner.
I was hoping he wouldn't notice that I could capture him since he was paying attention top right but that didn't work out too well.  Paul: Bad.  Aji Keshi.  After a while, it becomes very unsatisfying to win on lucky moves like this even when they work (which they will from time to time).  Personally, I'd rather not win than get lucky on "hope they won't notice" moves.  I usually say: dude, you're in atari if they don't notice on a move like this.  You'll see what I mean after a few more games.  Poker is a game of chance. Go is not.
this move killed my cluster again didn't it?  Paul: Do you mean the R5 stones (triangles)?  Those are dead either way.  I believe this black move is a "splitting attack"  Arguably a poor one (maybe R12 is better?), but it does seem to try to disconnect the P9 stones (squares) from connecting to the R14 stones (circles).
Paul: This move is huge.  It may neutralize the Q17 stones, tries to build some territory and tries to use the (feeble though it may be) thickness from the B9 stones.  Another fine move here is Q15.  Always "hane at the head of two".
I probally should have gone F16 instead of C13 right? I wanted to try and make my stones on the left side live.  Paul: This seems reasonable to me.  Either black will try to take the left side or the top.  Which side seems bigger?  Possibly the L14 stone could have gone to C15 to "seal the corner" and prevent this approach in the first place.  L14 doesn't presently seem as useful as C15 would have been.
should I have gone C18 instead of C16?  Paul: 6 of one, half dozen of the other.  I feel like C18 might be too slow and C16 is better, but there's really no perfect solution here.  Black is probably going to get something no matter what.
wrong move?
Paul: this probably doesn't help enough... and the empty triangle is notoriously bad.
I should have been able to kill black's stone at C12 but for some reason it lived.  Paul: This game is rarely about killing.  It's actually quite difficult to kill things.  It's better to threaten to kill things and make territory.  Let your opponents kill things while you make huge moyos and claim huge territory...  That said, although black is starting this fight at a disadvantage (tsuke nearly always does start at a disadvantage); I suspect it's impossible to kill black.  First, you may kill this one stone, but black will almost certainly get something while you kill it and he can easily run to his thickness in the middle (triangles).  This one stone doesn't even have to live if he can make sabaki (light skillful play), he'll still ruin your B9 stones.  They're too low and far away to connect properly with this stone in the way.
It's like whenever black plays a stone, I can't ever kill it, he always escapes and cuts my stones apart.  Paul: It's because of his influence.  If all those black stones across the way were white, I think you'd have a lot better chance.  For one thing, you could run to them instead of him and his stones would have nothing to connect to.  See variation.
I tried to stop him but he cut right in the middle of my stones so both sides ended up dying.
okay so I tried to learn from earlier and play my stones so that I can form the 2 eyes and live but did I put it in the wrong spot? should it have been F12 instead of F11?  Paul: If anything, your mistakes in this fight are playing too closely.  Learn to attack from a distance.  If you review this fight, I think the black stones (triangles) should have died a few moves back.  I suspect by touching him so often you gave him cutting points to use to escape.  Certainly some of the forcing moves were necessary, but if you'd have attacked from a stone or two away here and there, I think you could have surrounded him.  His ultimate goal is, of course, to flee to that thickness in the middle.  We saw that a variation ago.
again, black plays a stone and even though I have it pretty much surrounded, I can't kill it and I die.
black just easily surrounds me while I was trying to kill his stones, I just don't get it.  Paul: It's a combination of his thickness and his ability to use your cutting points against you.  I definitely think black is stronger than 15k ... I wouldn't lose too much sleep over it.  Soon, you'll do these things to people.
I thought that maybe I still had a chance to live if I could link both groups and make 2 eyes  Paul: It's going to be awfuly hard to make two eyes in there.  I don't think I could do it.  There's a lot going on in there.  It may be possible, but I suspect not.  There just isn't enough room.
this move stopped me from making the eyes right?  Paul: No, I think even if you'd have gotten to play there, it would have been a false eye, so you'd still be short an eye.
probally not a great idea to try and escape, I was alreayd dead right?    Paul: Yes, because of the influence from the triangles.  You have nowhere to run.  Plus, he can cut you at F13 and then the running is pointless.
okay I tried playing defensively again and placing stones where I thought if black attacked I would die.
probally a pointless move right? I was trying to maye surround the 2 black stones at S8 and S9 so maybe I could live on right side.  Paul: right idea, but probably a little late.  So yes, pointless.  Perhaps you were hoping the triangles weren't dead? I think if black plays T7, they only have one liberty...  It might be possible to get two eyes by exploiting that though (variation) if and only if it were white's turn here.
once again black manages to escape death by linking and killing my stones clusters.
was this a pointless move on black's part?  Paul: Not really.  Certainly, there's no way to kill white's bulky 10 shape here, but he's hoping you can't read it out.
another pointless move on black's part? what was he trying to do? I asked him at the end of the game but he didn't say anything.  Paul: He's hoping he can build a dead shape in here because he suspects you're a less experienced player.  One you let him have two moves, I believe he had a chance.  But he needs to make sure you can't escape first.
if I figured if I killed the stone at P11, I could save my cluster of white stones at O9, but it didn't work out
LordVader [1k]: hi LordVader [1k]: good morning :)
zakandrz [1d]: gm, gg
DV: This often happens on KGS ...  As far as I know: C is the way how it is played in professional go. But most of my opponents seem to play B instead of C.  Emp: both are valid moves, the difference is their focus. C is strengthenning himself before going to R6. B is limiting b's extension at upper part of the board.
DV: Usually I play like ...
DV: In pro games I've always seen A as response, but on KGS most players seem to play B instead. I'm not sure how to respond to it.  Emp: if w goes for B, b can just take A, very thick for b.
DV: A seems like nice shape, but it gives so much away in terms of territory. So I try to avoid it. B  gives white a smaller base so that it is still not totally alive.
emp: very bad move, broken
DV: This is kind of annoying though. Which makes me wonder if  A was correct.  Playing B instead of C would have made things easier too off course.
DV: This is kind of annoying. I spend a lot of time to get this alive. And I feel like white missed a couple of oppuritinities to kill my group.  emp: try to forsee 'annoying' things and prepare for them at ease. no way b can't be eaten without mistakes.
DV: here I wonder a bit why white didn't play A because it looks like sente to me.  emp:O19 gives w a ko, it's hard for b here anyway.
DV: this cost me a lot of time, but all by al I think this game is still even here.  emp: because b's got P8 weakness, w got sente, it's not as even as it seems.
DV: I would have played B instead of A.  emp: B is good, A is agreesive and not necessarily bad.
Here my plan is to play as many forcing moves as possible from the lower side to build influence first. I am neglecting N12 in this process so that I can play a central move in last-minute to reduce white influence.
DV: This is to settle and because I concider M11 sente for white.
DV: From this point I concider myself slightly ahead.  I played F4 high because ... see variation
I guess this is a big mistake from my side. I should have played C.  I blindly expected he would play A. Which is off course wrong.  emp: 73 is incoherent with 71...
LV: I concidered A instead but there is too much aji around B if I play like that.
DV: The stratigic value of these 2 stones is starting to get smaller. And capturing them would be gote for white anyway. So I can neglect this move.
DV: This group is not 100 procent alive yet. And a white move at A would result in huge influence for white. So I decided to reinforce my group. Playing A myself seems would reduce more of white his influence but my group wouldn't really become stronger, there would remain a lot of forcing moves.
mDV: I concidered A instead of B. Because there are a lot of points in the corner. If I would end up in sente that would be manageable. But my guess is that I would not have ended up with sente ... (see variation)
DV: I just do not have to review my B-group yet. I can wait a bit more.  Playing A would hurt my C stone. So before I move in ... I first play a solid 2 point extension. after that it will be easier to play D and it will be easier to invade at A.  The fact that my extension is on 2nd line bothers me a bit . Cause that will mean that white will play many forcing moves to push me down on 2nd line later, and he will have the chance to use his influence after all. But playing on 3th line instead of 2nd line would not be safe enough for me. Therefor I play on 2nd line anyway.
now I need to defend my group. :)  I see B,C,D and E are 4 forcing moves I concidered  I also concider A. In my opinion A is an important keypoint.  emp: usually, it's of high priority to have a way out. to do L&D inside  is a torture... ur 'forcing moves' are gifts to ur opponents in a situation like this, try to avoid them as possible as you can.
I played these 3 moves first because it avoids an annoying move of white on A which would destroy my eyespace.  emp: w is too happy to play along ...  these moves of b are the reason it's getting very hard for b later on. try to realize the pain before u suffer from it.
DV: This move seems necessary to me.
DV: I did not see this move coming.  And I was not sure how to deal with it.  Maybe I should have played A ?  emp: it's there after K7.
I slightly missread this only at this point I suddenly noticed the cutting point at A.
I am a bit surprised here that white is not interested in pushing through.  emp: w has K8 weakness.
I first play this move to secure my group a bit more.  emp: good move, considering w's overwhelming wall at the centre , b has to be worried about safty.
I concidered A, but B is sente for both.
in my opinion this move is a bit slack of white.  I concidered both A and B. But B looks more forcing.  emp: h7 is very serious for w, 108 is ok
DV: At first sight I thought I could capture this stone with a keima.  emp: be aware w's wall... b is fighting in a dangerous place.  it's all because b's N12 group got shut inside and b has to do a lot 'wall building' for w...
I was planning to play A here but suddenly noticed I made a mistake. (see variation)
So I decided to try to live in the corner instead.
emp: too small
DV: This is of course an emergency situation. I think white could probably have killed my stones here. And I wonder a bit why he did not.
DV: Here I wonder a bit if white could have killed my group. At first sight I think he could not. But my feeling tells me there could be some tesuji.
DV:  A or B ...  B makes more points I think.
DV: I did see it coming but didn't really have the chance to do anything about it.
DV: taking the side seems the only way to get a fair chance.
Threatening to cut at A and maybe closing in white. But I do not see how to actually finish it off :s
A can easily be cut.
DV: it looks like it's all over now.
DV: Well, it's a long shot. and of course I expected white A or white B. but it looks like he wanted to give me a last chance. :)
This is a little trick to play A in sente.
DV: and looks like it works. It's alive. So I am happy.  emp: u should feel lucky. b should have resigned.
DV: this was a bad idea of me.
And it's kind of painful to choose between A and B.
DV: Greedy of me.
I'm not sure but I think A would have been bigger.
DV: missread ... and It looks like I am already too far behind to win.
d3 better for w?  Peti29: at your level (and even at mine) it's hard to understand the difference so early in the game. It depends on your long term plan which to choose. I believe it may be a very important decision at pro level, but for us kyus, both are just as well playable.
Peti29: You ask a lot about josekis. I advice you not to become too obsessed with them yet. It is more than enough to know only the most basic 2-3 josekis at 14k. You have to learn more important aspects of the game first.  Anyways I found this about the current situation: http://senseis.xmp.net/?34PointHighApproachLowExtension According to that b7 would be at C3. I say this not to contradict myself about josekis but because I don't really like the E4 E6 shape of black's stones.
Peti29: not the best place to invade IMO. Would be better at O3, especially that the marked black stones are placed so high.
I thought I would look very good on the bottom after this.  Peti29: good.
Peti29: Maybe a bit passive but since you're in a good position you can afford to play safe.
Peti29: Why? Nothing to fear (see variations).
Peti29: very slow for white.
Xpose [14k]: ty
atnnn [14k]: np
This position looks weird, what would have been a good joseki? How should I have used my apparent strength on the bottom?  Peti29: I'm afraid this is far from any joseki :). You did well though. You have built a very strong wall and white is crawling on the second line with a very small corner. Could it even be better? ^^
Peti29: Finally a progressive move from white. It might be better to attack the top right corner though.
Peti29: nice :)
Peti29: That's very small. White has to attack now. (For example at one of the marked places.)
I couldn't decide where to play. Where would have been best?  Peti29: At first I disliked this move because it is worth like 0 points. But looking at it a second time it works very well with nearly all of your other stones (triangles). It has great influence. As you are in a very good position you can afford a move like this. It's like a long term investment. So I like it now :).  I marked possible big points instead of tengen with squares.
Peti29: this is ok for w I think.
Peti29: In GO, every move makes a choice. You are saying with this move that you give up the right side in exchange for influence. You already got plenty of influence but you're short on territory so I'm not sure this is a wise choice. However now you got a huge moyo. Still, maybe something like R13 would have been better.
Peti29: way too slow. White has to attack.
Peti29: even slower. You passed away your chance to claim back the side.
Peti29: No need to connect. The R9 group has plenty of room to get life on the side and the corner lives already.
Peti29: You wall is enormous now. You will have to try to turn it into territory soon.
Peti29: White is way behind so he has to invade.
Peti29: Start to get territory on the bottom side / center instead. This is too small.
Peti29: This is meaningless (see variations).
Peti29: Not good. This is worth like 3 points. There are much bigger points on the board (triangles) or better places if you want to fight (squares).
Was this a good idea? I wanted to attack left side before it became stronger, but I might have been to hasty.  Peti29: It's a good idea I think. Now you can steal the corner.
Peti29: Whenever you have a big moyo like in this game. Your opponent will sooner or later invade. You must not fear this! It is good. You have to use your strength from your moyo to chase your opponent while making territory. You must not aim to kill the invader! Rather let him live small.
This and the following moves look bad now. What is best continuation at the bottom?  Peti29: White almost lives there. You don't want to try and kill those stones because it's likely that you'll fail and that'd cost a lot. Rather keep a distance and build territory while keeping white under pressure.  But your sequence is not particularly bad.
Peti29: Good throw-in! And you already earned a lot of points :).
Peti29: No.
Peti29: Yes :).
Peti29: good
Peti29: You got to do a few life-and-death problems to practice fights. This cost you 27 points!
Peti29: Too small. Gotta secure the upper right corner first.
Peti29: again, small, and not really needed. See variations. White can't really do harm.
Peti29: Good for w.
Is this best result for TR corner?  Peti29: lots of, lots of variations can be possible here. I can't tell if this is the best but it turned out good for black here.
I think I would have won if I had played g6.  Peti29: O2 is a late endgame move (worth 1 point). G6 would have been better but I would have tried L18 :) (See variations.)
What should I have played?  Peti29: Simply H10 (see var). White can not really do anything. Sry, I cut your variation as the many variations got quite confusing...
Peti29: As the proverb sais "Don't let the snake into your territory!".
Peti29: This white invasion is fatal. Game over for black.
n18 escaped me.
Xpose [14k]: the e2  is mine right? atnnn [14k]: yes Xpose [14k]: kk
crux: I don't like this move.  It does very little to stabilize your group; Black is able to attack it later.  In terms of territory it is small.  It also has no effect on any of Black's positions.  A move at A would do more for your shape, but like the game move it would also feel slow.  B would have a small effect on Black's position.  Tenuki may be possible, but expect Black to attack.
crux: Black really wants the point A to finish his double wing formation.  Maybe it would be better to play there in order to foil his plan.
crux: Black got exactly the position he wanted.  His moyo in the top left is bigger than White's at the bottom.
crux: Too small, I think.  Black can expand his position faster than you can.  He has an ideal point at A.
crux: The last two moves seem a bit crude to me.  They force Black to take territory, while adding little to your position.  This is a heavy way of playing.
crux: Throughout the whole game, at every point, Black gets exactly what he wants.  Fighting spirit requires that you at least consider blocking Black's path; then you need to read out the result.
crux: You've made five defensive moves in a row, while Black has been surrounding territory on two sides. While your groups are relatively safe now (the shape is still somewhat poor), it seems that Black has more points in secure territory than White has in potential (since the lower side can't be counted as all white).  On top of that, White's top right group seems weaker than Black's top center group.  I'm tempted to call it game over at this point.
crux: Meaningless move on a neutral point?  How about attacking at A or B?  It's Black's only weak group on the board.
crux: Game over for sure.
crux: Again following orders, giving away points.
The opening is fairly normal up to this point. Black five could be played in a number of places (P17 for instance), but the move at F17 is perfectly fine.
I haven't studied much joseki, so I didn't know the best response. I went for influnce with a kosumi, but now looking back I should have went for territory. Right? What is the best move for that?
The move at E16 may not be the best choice because contact plays often make the opponent's stones stronger. To me, K16 seems a bit better because it makes a base for black's stones and extends towards the upper right corner.
Now black is pushing from behind, and white is getting a huge corner.
Locally, E11 is probably better. If white tries to cut at F13, black can use the net (see alternate),  but even with the play at E11 white is gaining fourth line territory which is an unfavorable result for black.
I not sure about this move. Is there a better way to defent aginst a cut? Or should I have played else where?    Locally, G19 is probably better but stopping white's advance on the left side is more important than protecting against the cut (E11 or F4 might be a good way to do this).
Don't know about this one either. I should have play something to stop his advance on the left side, right? Maybe C6?   A play at C6 might be little too close to white's strength in the upper left. I like F4 or Q10 better. The former attempts to reduce white's expansion, while the latter takes advantage of black's thickness on the left. K4 is also big.
The peep at F10 only helps strengthen white's inposing left side. Black 27 might be better placed at K4.
Was my advance to the center too early?   J10 seems a little overconcentrated. A play near the star points on the bottom or the right side might be better.
White captured the bottom left courner and most of the bottom. What would have been the best way to stop White?   The 3-3 invasion in the lower left corner is still an option. Other possibilities for black 31 might be O3, Q6, C10, or D16.
Locally, I like N4 better. It makes a heavy shape but white's two stones at the bottom are overconcentrated as well.
F3 creates a difficult situation for black. The exchange through black 53 is very profitable for white. The 3-3 insvasion is still viable, and it seems a little more uregent after the exchange at the bottom. A move at N5 might also be good.
This fight here becomes quite confusing.
This is the fight that cost me the game. What is the best way to defend aginst P17?   Black should push white toward his thickness on the left. R13 is a little less severe than P15 but it essentially does the same thing.
This is the right idea. You don't have to kill your opponent's stones, only threaten to do so and make a profit in the process.
White 86 is one space too far. Black should cut white in half at N17.
Q16 is probably better because it robs white of eye shape.
This is where I resign. I am still working on counting so tips on that would be nice too. Thank you.   As far as counting liberties, my best reccomendation is to practice life and death problems for  few minutes every day.This will help hone your reading skills. As to your earlier question about what handicap should be played between you and your opponent, this is difficult to say having only seen one game. If this is someone you play with regularly I would recommend playing a few even games and then making adjustments from there.
**Was O15 alright?  I know that N15 is possible, but  what are the variations possible?
lisbon [9k]: what kyu?
lisbon [9k]: ? laurellias [18k?]: Not sure, between 15 and 20 I think. lisbon [9k]: 9 stones is a lot
**P12 was meant to stop the two white stones from connecting.  Would it have been better to play elsewhere (ie. the left of the board?)
**Unsure of this move is appropriate
lisbon [9k]: difficult to play laurellias [18k?]: I'm really bad so I'm not sure how much the 9 stones will help me...
**Moves 15 to 35 - very bad moves by me.  Not only did black lose all the stones played, black also aided white in building a very thick wall to the right.  Would it have been better to continue building frameworks elsewhere, or was it appropriate to enter a local fight now?  Also, what can black have done to reduce losses?   lisbon [9k]: until now u made the right moves lisbon [9k]: how long been playing?  cayol :lisbon is right. N2 is not a good move, because your group is in danger. White is threatening your group. You can counterattack because White is not so strong : he has no eyes.
lisbon [9k]: ? laurellias [18k?]: I've been going to a go center for lessons once a week for approx. half a year.  But I haven't been able to absorb a lot since it's in Japanese ;p and I skip lessons.  Also, have played about 15 games against human opponents.
**Again, what should have been done to minimize white's space?  cayol : see  previous comment
**Below are comments by my opponent.  I would like to know if there was anyone I could have made the two black stones H3 and K4 into a liveable group.  I also miscalculated and thought the group in the lower right was live though territory is obviously miniscule.  (Did not notice Q4 is in atari until larer).    lisbon [9k]: is that so? lisbon [9k]: oh lisbon [9k]: I missed the time laurellias [18k?]: Ah, is it possible to continue? lisbon [9k]: unfortunately not lisbon [9k]: u have a good territory in the center laurellias [18k?]: I was told recently that in a handicap game I should use black's influence stones to work towards the center... lisbon [9k]: u lost all the corners though laurellias [18k?]: Nods lisbon [9k]: actually u should ude the H stones to attack lisbon [9k]: use lisbon [9k]: oterwise ur playing is good laurellias [18k?]: Should I have attacked more? lisbon [9k]: yes lisbon [9k]: a littlr too passive laurellias [18k?]: I think so too, but every time I try to attack I tend to commit suicide. lisbon [9k]: u must not overplay  cayol : You made a nice territory in the center.  But white didn't play very well. He let you do it.
I tried to see if white can save his two stones and kill yours. But he can't.
This is not joseki, but I dont see it as a bad move  DrPepper: It is too far from the enclosure and carries no threat to connect under, so it is a pretty bad move on those counts.
This is not joseki but I dont see it as a bad move  DrPepper: In almost all respects, playing into a "hane at the head of two" shape is bad, unless there are distinct tactical reasons to.
Now this B stone is far too close to thickness. It should be at R11.
DrPepper: "A" and "B" are two things to consider for this group's second eye, so I'm not sure this is such an urgent place to play. Staying ahead at O7 is considerable, as is simply playing R13.
This I think is bad because I played near the force. I think d10 would be better  DrPepper: You should reduce the effectiveness of black's thickness from a distance, but normally one plays either F3 or G3 to do this. As happens in the game, the three space extension requires defense.  The point of the play down here for white is to ruin the bottom side. By playing this looser extension, you turn black's approach into a move that has a distinct tactical followup.
DrPepper: At this point in the game, I don't think this is sente. If you want to forestall black "A", try white D10. If he invades, your thickness is working well, if not, then you have a chance to fix your shape later. In either case, D10 is very valuable, as it is the last big fuseki point.
DrPepper: Why not just "A", simply?
DrPepper: Black could cut here at L4.
DrPepper: I would prefer to cut at "A" and keep my groups linked. The proverb "cut the side you don't want" applies in cases where your opponent has play in either case. Here, your opponent has nothing if you cut at "A", and it links your groups, so it seems best to me.
DrPepper: This increases the value of your cutting stones, but hurts your right side two-space extension group.
DrPepper: don't touch weak stones if you don't have to. Unfortunately you cannot lean on the F4 group, so I think just moving out diagonally here is good.  Secondly, it is worth asking, are these center cutting stones more valuable than black's cutting stones at O9? It is hard for me to say, but I would prefer a firm capture at O10. Black will enclose your cutting stones, probably, giving you the opportunity to fix your corner. See the variation.
I think I've been lucky, but I think I haven't  played correctly  DrPepper: did the contact play "A" carry a specific threat? If not, it is a sign that it wasn't a good move. If so, then it is a sign that N10 is not a good move.
DrPepper: This is a thin move, leaving black to push through your knight move ("split shape"). See variation.
DrPepper: Enclosing a live group in gote is not good, so all you've done is link some stones up. That may seem ok, but while there is action against black's center group, you should keep pressing, and try to help this group in the flow of that fight.
DrPepper: Now black is thick in the center, and can bother you with loose play like this.
DrPepper: I will ask again, because it is a question you should ask yourself a lot-- is this contact move "A" a move with a specific threat? If so, then F17 is a bad move; if not, then "A" was a bad move.
DrPepper: See variation
DrPepper: "A" has just the slightest bit more impact on black's area above, and connects just as well.
Why peep when you can cut?
See the variation. You should be able to capture one of N4 or G5.
Q: Maybe I sould make base for D16?  A: C or D 14 are standard responses to this approach.  Either would be bigger than R15, because the Q16 group and S13 stone are both already close to settled.
You have good shape here, so your stones won't die, but white has taken almost the whole side and corner.  Something like C17 or C12 would probably have been better than F14.
This is quite timid.  It gives white's invasion a chance to spread.
This anchors you, but gives white a chance to link his attacking groups D7 and G4.  At this stage of the game, one of the most important things to do is keep your opponent separated.  Several small groups are much weaker than a few large groups.
Q: "thank you" move by white?  A: Yes, good trap at F7.
Q: I have many doubts according following sequence...  A: Yes, this move feels wrong somehow.  Maybe try Q2/Q3 or O5 first...?
This feels awkward for both players.
Wasted move, I think.
Q: Would be better to defend in M10?  A: No, I don't think so.  This is the right kind of move because it threatens to cut white in several places, and white is still thin enough to have to react to that threat.  I'm not sure about the exact placement of this move.
This is a very big move for white, because it settles his side group once and for all.  Up until now, a move at S12 could have reduced the group to a single-eye group, forcing it to run.
This is not a bad move, but there are bigger moves elsewhere.  Around L17 or M11, for example.
Big move for white.
Good, but late.
R: I was pushing without clear idea to cut after :(  A: Yes, this was a good idea, but just a little too late.
This would have been better on the side somewhere.  Unless you have a solid wall to work from, it's too hard to make territory in the center of the board.
White played very poorly on the side.  You picked up almost 20 points in that exchange.
Q: Coul I make better in this corner?  A: I don't think so.  White already has this corner quite secure.
Daedin: Until wD13, this is a standard joseki. D13 is however usually played at C14.  The reason is difficult to explain clearly. To put it simply, wit C14 the corner is solid with only one move. With D13, there is still a weakness at C15 that black may use later on if a fight develops in the area - for instance, a Black play around C11 becomes an attack against the White group.
Daedin: This moves seems to be dual purpose - both attacks the corner and the White group at the top. However, it is too far from the corner to be a threat, and too far from the White group.  Moreover, it induces a White move at D6 that strengthen the corner while attacking the Black stone.  Other possibilities for Black could have been around R12 or F3.
Daedin: Here we see that D13 is a bit loose; it D13 were at C14, White could simply tenuki.
Daedin: On with F9 seemed ok to me - Black is being pushed towards the White corner, where he has nothing to gain.
Daedin: F9 would have been more severe.
Daedin: This cuts White in two, and destroys the shape of the group; E8 seems a little out of place now.  However, it is very huge to let White double approch the corner.
Daedin: Here White should take the opportunity to use Black's tenuki with something around O3
Daedin: White doesn't really have anything to gain right now from chasing the Black group. I'd rather go to a double approach at O4 or O3.
Daedin: The sequence let Black defend the corner in sente.
Daedin: White could abandon L4 without problem - it is not really big.
Daedin: Another move that might be worth considering is the weakness at A, that we always find in this kind of shape.
Daedin: There are not many points for White in the center. It is still wide open at O10 or L9
Daedin: Not much to protect for Black. Maybe he should rather go and reduce the center.
Daedin: I don't see anything White should fear here
R: This is a strange move... normal would be at A, B or C
R: A good response I think.  You are securing corner territory while attacking these awkward stones.  A move around K17 looks to be painful for black.
R: This is not good.  Your stones are severely overconcentrated.
R: Less severe than variation, since white can form a better base.
R: Here r4 is huge.
Am I too passive from start until now?  R: I think you are still fine
R: This move is no good, you give black too many chances and do not punish him for attaching to your stone at A.
Is it good to play at H8 instead of F9? Or I should play at other place instead of such small move at F9?  R: This is surely better than H8.
I am not sure whether J4 is good to expand my territory.  R: Attaching to this stone is not good and gives black ideal shape.
R: Now the relationship between k4 and o4 is much improved.
R: It might seem like you are creating large territory, but there are too many ways to reduce.  Also black now has now greatly stabilised.
R: With this move you are helping black to expand his moyo while gaining nothing yourself.
R: Luckily black did not play as in the variation :D
I don't know what I was doing when I played at M12. Is there a better move instead of M12?  R: Looks like an OK move to me.  You have to take chances if you want to reduce blacks enormous moyo.
I think these two to three steps are helping Black to build wall, I don't know how to invade Black.
R: There might be something around R12 that can be considered.
I think N15 is better. Isn't it?  R: Yes, this doesn't connect A and B, and doesn't really attack C...
R: This is a severe mistake.  White cannot live in the corner like this without any potential in the area.
R: Luckily black didn't see it!
R: And he gave you sente! You are so lucky hehe.  Many huge moves come to mind here.
R: This doesn't do anything.  Even if black ignores.
If I play at L11, would there be any problems?
R: This is why R4 was so big.
R: Giving up sente like this is not good. I would rather play J2 and keep sente.
Should I play at D9?
R: Missed out on a huge monkey jump here.
R: Nice endgame.
After some steps I captured two black stone, I can't calculate whether I lost or won some points if I play at P5 instead of N6 in step 174.  R: I think the two options are more or less the same.
R: Maybe a bit paranoid.  If you have time, read it.  1 point can cost you the game.
R: This was your biggest mistake I think.  You have to remember that it's mostly better to split groups.  Then in the worst case scenario you will kill one and the other will live.  The worst case scenario here is that B3 dies and the whole group lives.
I know I am wrong to play at B5, I should play at E7 instead. It led a big problem.
arukasaru [3k]: hi
B: So far it looks quite even, I think. Should I have answered at F17? I was afraid of losing the central influence of san-ren-sei.  N: i do not like this move so much, because it also makes white stronger.  F17 would be a bad move, when you look at the rest of your stones, it should be at F16
N: a difficult choice, but i think a would block on the other side is possible too, to keep consistent with san-ren-sei (see variation as example)
N: this shape is interesting. We see it more often when a white A, black B exchange is made previously. But in that case a black move at C is much more powerfull (check for yourself).  The good part is you can be happy with sente
B: Probably I should have played C6, due to the C13 stones, but I felt like I could have been pressed easily.  N: it would certainly have been more difficult for white to come up with an anwer. The more i look at it, the more i think you should have played there.
B: I played here because I felt it was a too good point for white... but the outcoming was quite dangerous for me.  N: i think it was not necessary to play so agressive.  White is still quite safe, and if you finish the yoseki on the bottom side, you will have sente.
B: I played this to make a base with this group so I could switch to run out with L3. Right?  N: making a base is certainly good. If you are strong on one side, you can fight strongly on the other side.
N: bad move
B: I think white should have played J2 here.  N: absolutely or even G2 Whites move is simply bad and misses the direction of play
N: black is quite happy now
B: I am quite comfortable living here, but in exchange I think the white influence is a high cost for living...  N: i don't mind the white influence, it is difficult to make territory in the center.
N: this feels like the good direction, but not the best point.
N: endgame
B: After the previous sequence I think that white influence is not so big now. So I decided to abandon R6, and try to reduce white as much as possible. Other point I considered was around K10. It should not hurt if white makes more influence because it is limited and I stil haveK5.  N:- i think the white influence is still the same (but no so much.  - It should be crystall-clear that r6 should be abandoned, it is small, only endgame, no life or death of a group depend on it. - I think your move is ok, it is very big, but also it is a nice reinforcement for your top left group, wich might become troublesome in the future.
N: now white starts giving you a big present.
I think that white did a bad reading here.
B: I was happy to play this move, but afraid of white E10... it would be hard to invade the white moyo.  N: still too soft see how the white group on top has weakend because of the marked stone.
White played this, maybe better than E10.
B: So I decided to build a big moyo and go for some territory on the top, the left or the center depending on white response.  N: ok
B: I am completely lost now: how to answer here? If M16 or O17, I am leaving a lot of space for white on the top.  N: this is very funny, in your last comment you already said how you should respond ;-) If you build a moyo, you can't keep all.
B: I was not sure about playing L17 because white would be reinforced, so I choose this one but again I am not sure about what would have been the correct move.  N: Ouch! this move you should play if you are sure to make territory on the left or right side of it (or kill the left or right side)
B: Should I have blocked from P17?  N: of course, see previous comments, you should play consistent with previous moves. But i think it would be easy for white to survive.
N: bad shape
B: Maybe too small, and L18 or P12 would have been better.  N: big move, the mistake is previous
N: now white is back in the game
B: Now I have a weak group thus giving white a lot of chances to reduce... :-(  N: i think this group is not so weak: you are strong on the left and on the right and on the bottom: so many homes to run to. also there is eye-shape on top.
B: I was quite sure of connecting now with Q9. I am right?  N: you seem to be.
N: huge
N: is it sente??
B: I think this is a bad move... I was afraid of a cut but there is not real cut here... where should I have played instead?  N: many big points:
B: I did not notice that white H5 connects.  N: keep focused ;-)
B: I made a mistake here, I should have played Q14 but I had forgotten that side... :-( Of course I lost the game here. This is my last comment. Thanks in advance for your analysis! Jorge a.k.a. brindis.  N: unfortunate, without it, it would have been a close game i think. This is my last comment too.
Is this the best move?
What is the best response to this move?
This response is ok.
White gains a lot of territory from this exchange. What is the best resonse?  Never go walking so far from the side. A 3 to 5 line exchange is reasonable but nothing more than that.
Not urgent.
This spot was more important for black.
I'm not sure about this move.  This is good, protects the center for black.
Not important.
Not important.
Not important either.
There is not that much that white can do here.
Does not add any value, maybe preventing a 3-3 invasion.
Not good.
Even worse.
I bellive this cut cost me the game. Is there a better way to reduce the damage?  You managed it quite nicely.
Not important.
Not important.
Good.
This gives away one ko threat.
Black to pincer at A can be considered too.
White should play A here.
Note that white play on the 4th line, so I might want to play A to secure the corner.  If white play on the 3rd line, black B is correct.
Without the exchanges (black triangles vs white squares), black to play A is severe, aim to invade at B next.
Wrong move, pls look at the variation.
Here, you should choose to capture the corner.  I got an impression this is trick play by white.
This is too good for white.
Keep the aji at B for good.  You should play A here.
Not a good invasion for white...  If white can jump at A to reduce, he should not take risk by invading.
Crude moves by white.
This is a mistake by white,  You should play A, not be bothered by the cutting point.  If white play B, black C, if white play D you can play E.
Well, white should tenuki, no point saving the 3 white stones.
I rather play A to grab the corner.  Right now, you can't ascertain the value of a wall...
White should play A, black can't possibly live inside the corner.
White should play A.
Black should play A.  Pls look at the variation.
Black A better.
Black A better.
Black should play A.
Big mistake, white should play A.  What if you cut here?  Pls look at the variation.
Black A better.  Ko at B, heavier for white.
Black A better.
You should fight the ko at A directly.
You wasted one ko threat this way.
Black A better, one less threat for white and better aji, you realized it too late in the game...
Losing move.  This is as good as losing the ko unconditionally.
This threat is too small.
At this point, I believe you did not see the aji for white A, black B and white C.  D or E, miai for white.
White should play A, black B isn't that big.
White gave you a chance to play A.  But even then, white play B, also doesn't look good for you.
Game over.  I shall end my review here.  Hope you did learn something.  My suggestion for you to improve is to study more pro games, pay attention to how the pros make "urgent", "huge" or "thick" moves.
-H-: This is an excercise in the direction of play. Where do the corner stones "look", i.e. where do they want to play next?  The 4-4 stone looks in all directions, from D16 in the direction of K16 and D10, as well as the centre, and also a bit into the corner.  The 5-4 stone is like 4-4, but it takes some of the interest from one side and adds it to the other. Q15 looks more in the direction of Q9 and less in the direction of K16. It also looks more into the centre, and less into the corner.  The 3-4 stone is also biased to one side. Q3 looks more into the direction of Q9 and less in the direction of K4. It also looks less into the centre, and more into the corner.  So, after you played this move, the right side has become the predominant interest of two opposing stones. It is Black's turn now, so he can play there first. I think that this is good for Black.  It would have been better to play the komoku in the other direction, where Black doesn't have such a good move.  However, this does not lose the game.
This looks nice for Black, but it is no problem yet for White.
-H-: Approaching the 5-4 stones from the corner is usually bigger than taking a side like this. In this diagonal fuseki, territory tends to be more important than centre influence, because the board is already broken up more than in a parallel fuseki. If you want to play on the left side here, playing keima from the hoshi is likely better because it emphasizes territory.   This high and far move invites an invasion in order to build central influence, but it is not clear that White can use that influence properly afterwards. Also, D5 already limits the further expansion on this side.
PC: At this point I don't know what to do.  Did I make a mistake already, or is this where I started making the mistake?  -H-: This is a quite premature invasion. I think that you should be OK with aiming to enclose Black.  Black should approach the white formation instead, threatening a better invasion while making points.
-H-: OK.
-H-: This is often not the best point when your opponent plays the big diagonal with the aim of settling. In this case, attaching at D14 seems good locally, i.e. if you want to cut there now.  However, these are just two weak stones. Your first instinct at this point should be to attack them as a whole, either by simply connecting with F15, or by trying to enclose them with G13 or F13 directly. That way, they still don't live, but your own weaknesses become less.  If you want to play G13 or F13, you have to read out what will happen when Black cuts at F16.
-H-: This is the problem with D13. Black gets better shape than White.
-H-: White should block at C14 now. This is too submissive.
-H-: This is good for Black, owing to the bad moves at D13 and C13.
-H-: This is premature again. Black should just complete his corner.
-H-: You don't have to separate the black stones, because they are not alive if they connect here. Better enclose the group as a whole.  The problem is also that your group becomes very cramped when you defend miniscule points like this. The best strategy against an opponent who invades everywhere is to force him to live everywhere small.  The mistake is of the same general nature as D13.
Is this move wrong?  how can I know whether the proverb applies in a given situation?  -H-: No, it is perfect.
-H-: Not so fast, better play B9 first. Black has no good answer.  As a guideline: getting the hane at the head _and_ at the foot is good for your shape.
-H-: An important point.
-H-: Too greedy. There are not many points here, because C4 can build a base in either direction. Better repair your cuts in the side group.
-H-: White should capture the black stone directly, by atari from the other side. This may well be the losing move.
-H-: Now both sides are weak.
-H-: You cannot hope to achieve anything with these stones right now. Better jump out with G12.
-H-: E9 is still weak, and E12 is one move before capture.
-H-: You should not add stones where you are strong. Help your weak stones with G12.
-H-: The lower left stones are already secure. You have to help your weak stones. G12 is most urgent.
-H-: Now it is very difficult for White. He has not even time to protect D11.
-H-: Black is very nice. He could have played D11.
-H-: White doesn't have time for this, he must get out first, or the group dies.
Game over.   To come back to your question whether your mistakes where rather of strategic or tactical nature:  I would not distinguish between "tactics" and "strategy". Go is always played on the whole board, every move must fit into the whole game. There are more than four directions on a go board.  With C12 and C9, Black played some unreasonable moves. However, they are not unreasonable because they can't live, they are unreasonable because living is all they can do -- they are latently unimportant even when they are played. This may be a hint to why your plays at D13, C13, C10 are submissive: All you do is capture unimportant stones.
peterchris [3k]: thx fifrelin [3k]: merci
FR: Is this pincer OK with R16?
FR: What do You think about g14? Is H14 or tenuki better?
FR: How about J13? Was D12 (A) better?  B is also possible
slow c9 better
FR: Here is the main question: how can white use J17 thickness to deal with P17? In the game, I think, their potential fade away unused :(
This move is when the corner is the primary concern Black is happy to play this sequence as it helps him to get stronger
FR: Is N17 right? If "yes", then how to develop it further? If "no", then how white can attack black here? (What do you think about marked points)
no good
FR: missread here :(
Black's stones in the bottom corner are very weak so you can extend further
FR: black misstake - they must S6
FR: My big misstake, the variation it better for white  Another question: can you show big  points for white to develop further?  - N9 would be my choice first off The other marked points should be kept in mind
FR:  black E4 looks better
Whites placement here creates the foundation for a large framework. However, it's your move.
White develops his framework with the biggest move for it. His development is still slow.
Johnny5: Not sure if this was a good move.  I was hoping to make my corner very secure.  This move is slow. it isn't bad, but it doesnt have much spirit. Considering all your stones are on the 4th line, I'll mark off some suggestions.  1 - now white must approach a corner. 1 threatens to develop a huge moyo growing from the bottom upwards.  2 - this move is maybe a bit slow, but it prevents an approach at R14 from being very effective (leaving white with only C6 as an effective approach move). It also aims at invading around A & making probing moves around the top left corner stone more effective. Plus the top right becomes closer to territory (although R17 lives, white won't play there, it will give too much power to you)
Johnny5: I wasn't sure what joseki I should use.
Your shape isn't as good here
Johnny5: I felt like this was the biggest place.  This move is fine.
Johnny5: This felt kind of close and uncomfortable.  This pincer allows white to take the corner.
This is a good invasion, although your bottom left group is a bit weak.
Johnny5: I felt a small bit of happiness at this capture.  :D  This should win the game
All your groups are powerful. K17 is almost dead. Don't cooperate with white.
White easily nets this! too late!
Johnny5: This turned out pretty bad for me.  >.<
:(
Johnny5: I could have kicked myself for this.
too bad about the last mistake, but i think i have shown many ways to sharpen your play. i would recommend life & death and a copy of attack & defense
is this too early?
black b14 looks like a mistake.  it protects the b16 stone which isn't important since white is alive on top whether ot not white catches the b16 stone.
this white d11 looks like it would be better if played at b13.  Why ?  because then white has a position on top of and below the black stones with a possible attack on them.  By playing D11, black is left with B13 which captures the c13 stone so black is much safer, and black then also threatens to take the b12 strone which would make black completely safe.  Always best to make the opponent have unsettled group.
Since white is trying to build something on left side, instead of giving away a stone at e12, how about playing e10 right away which threatens double atari at e12 ?
i think this is wrong
I think block from other side, see below.
now all the territory white was building is gone.  if blocked from other side it would still be there
this makes it even more painful.  the point of white's earlier moves around d9 werwe to build strength.  If they require c7 then they didn't efficiently build that strength.  White would like to play h3 instead of c7.  otherwise black is making territory and white isn't.
is this too slow?   no, but what if black had played g3 instead of b7 ? you're a little lucky here
h4 is what we call pushing from behind.  black is making more with j6 than you are with h4.
instead of n5, black could have made alot more with p7
is this correct choice?  seems ok sinve if black plays o16 black is both building large center territory and threatening m17 invasion.
why answer at k17 instead of j17 ?  the purpose of o15 is to support that resistance.  By answering at k17, what if black plays j17 next ?
this doesn't seem so big, this p17.  what abotu s9 instead ?  compare with if black plays s8 or r9 ?
i still like black s8 instead of p18
there are many bigger plays than n17
of course he can just cut me through and i will be way behind
instead of this h18 how about g16 which threatens j15 ?
black is letting white off the hook.  instead of f17, if black played g16, black is making big territory.
black made big territory white made small one
i think this plan is too risky
black too easy on white.  what if black attacked with s9 instead of r11 ?
maybe instead of s11, play r10
white is lucky
i think he can just hane at s9 and cause me alot of trouble
white falls behind by continually making safety plays.    if white had played r10, maybe this wouldn't be needed.  Try to get sente when possible !
instead of h8, what about c8 for black ?  compsre with b8 for white, after which black can't cut at c8 .
black play too slow here, allow me to reduce the influence ,if not the game is particulary over  yes, black could have played g10 instead of b13, or c8 .  [end of comments]
any other plan to run out?
I figured he wanted to build a base before he started attacking me. So it makes sense that he would play far away from my influence.  If I attack from either direction, he can extend in the opposite direction and press against one of my corner stones. With that in mind...
I go here. I know he's going to extend, so I all ready know my next move, which should be about...
Here. I understand my left stone has a lot of pressure on it. In my experience however, capture is not inevitable yet, and the moyo gained on the right will sort of compensate in case  I get sealed in.  Dr: see thread
He goes here. I was assuming he wanted to shake things up. not good in a handicap game to focus on one area.  Also, I think he was aiming at my moyo, because if I got a sansan, things would have been bad for him. If he extends upward, my moyo will have little potential for expansion.
So I attack, and also extend a big of my moyo. It's alittle shaky however. And I lose the moyo later in the game.
Dr: see thread
He's going for the corner. I think I mess up here.  Dr:  see thread
Dr:  see thread.  This seems heavy for b
I did that to cut off O3 from the rest and attack. Unfortunately, he uses his Q7 stone to extend and seal me in, resulting in MY capture. Suggestions?  Dr:  see thread
Dr:  this w group is about alive
Dr:  see thread
Dr:  see thread - w could do better.
Dr:  the large knights moves from 4-4 point are not territory. the w group is pretty much alive so no point in threatening it
I shouldn't have wasted my breath with attacking his group.  Dr:  see thread
Not Good.
Dr:  see thread
Dr:  see thread - this is a thank you move, forcing w to make a nice move
Dr:  see thread, maybe better
Dr:  now w has a large territory
Dr:  see thread
Dr:  this is hopeless.  too many cutting points
A rousing match. I get some territory on the upside, and he's fighting for his life. Unfortunately, I can not afford to invest all of my effort into killing, as the chaneces of that happening get less and less likely. Not only that, but my R12 group is completely screwed.  So, while theres still room for expansion(namely, I can attack his upper white stones), he got the side. Still, I think the board position is overall better for me. simply because his stones are too low and ineficient.  Dr:  w has 30-40 points on the side.  a good chunck of the 65-70 points needed to win.  b has 20-25 points in UR, no other real territory
Dr:  see thread
That sequence was unexpected.
He thinks he is satisfied with what he's done. I'm not going to capture the white group. Right now I am at a cross roads, however. I'm not sure what to do.  Should I extend to C7, kind of putting pressure on the whtie stone? No, because then he'll extend to C14. And then my D16 stone is in purgatory. Is this the price of developing my sides unevenly?!?  Dr:  game is hard for b now.  w has large lead in secure territroy as well as influence toward center.  b has no where to make an equally large territory.  See the threads - all the w groups are hard to kill now.  End of comments
What was I thinking when I made this move?  Well, I guess I still had the mindset of uneven development, expanding my paltry moyo on the upper right, and then really going downtown with L9, capping that sucker. It would have given me a divine upper hand in the game. Let's see how things played out?  Dr:  see thread
Maybe too small?
That wasn't too smart. I should have just blocked. It's too late now, however. So I decide to build up some sorely needed development on the left side. F16 looks RIPE. :)
Now I have a good moyo! What's more, white will have to expand towards my strong D4 group. I still will have sente.
Of course, I wanted to split him up. If I could kill C10, then my moyo would be stupendous.  If on the other hand, I kill C6, things still look pretty good. If I was playing a 9k, things definitely would have worked in my favor.  alas, he is 5k...
He extends to the moyo. I think it might have been better to play E8, forcing him to extend again, and then kill his C6 stone? That might have made things easier, as I have all ready determined to try and take it.  Instead however, I do this...(ugh)
I think that was a little too eager. Suggestions?
I definitely have the white stone now! unfortunately, he has the corner. It's a fair trade. which isn't good. Well, maybe not. after all, I still have a fair amount of influence in the center. Maybe I can expand...?
Now I'm trying to kill the upper white stones. My weak spot, however, is around E12, definitely. Do you think a patch aroundd there, and then forcing him to run to M9 would have worked? After all, if I could secure the top and bottom, I would have two good moyo's, and he would have useless thickness.  How do things go from here...?
Ouch. completely out of the blue. I guess my stones were a little thin, because even if I cut G5 off from J3 with H4, he can connect to E3. uh-oh...
Ah, excellent. he wasn't able to connect. unfortunately, I have way too many cutting points...
i thought about the other wrap-around, with K10. y'know, fatten the cow before I slaughter. But I didn't want to give him too many stones to work with, because he's thrashing desperately. It's do or die, now, and I needed to be careful.  what next...?
He's really making chaos.
FunHind [9k]: how am I doing? I should have noticed his K14 stone. I'm putting my F15 group into big trouble by leaving that cutting point.  I wanted to connect at F14. then extend to C14. I realize now, that that is reverse miai. so one of the options will be available to me, but he's going to put some serious presure on one of my groups. I courted the hand of death, and because that's the hand of a 5k, I paid dearly.
Agh! That move completely screws me over. I was expecting him to capture, and then I could seal him in. but this... things go downhill from here.  Now he might be able to save his two white stones. ayaiyai...
Not good, not good.
sumioshi [5k]: very good
not good...
Not good at all.
Overall, i've basically lost.  i hang in there for the rest of the game, and I would like to get some advice on the rest, but I really don't know what sort of questions to ask. I am bewildered as to how things just got real ugly real fast. The complexity of it all quickly overwhelmed me.  So, I will make very little comments from here on out, as my recognition of the game dwindles. I could use some help for this.
FunHind [9k]: grr.
FunHind [9k]: misclick.
sumioshi [5k]: np
This is a strange move. You played two moves ( Q16 and Q4 ) on hoshi (star) points, which means that you're emphasizing influence over territory (and it also means you are willing to give away the corners. A stone on the 4-4 corner does not claim the corner, and invites the opponent to jump into it, so that a wall can be built).   This third move is inconsistent with that plan - it does not make territory on the right side. If you want to play in this area, It's probably best to make the san-ren-sei opening by playing at q10.  There is an opening with r9 - the low Chinese opening. But in that opening q4 is at q3.
There is a general principle which is useful for players at your level.   Try to play in this order:  1) Corners 2) Sides 3) Center  This is because you need the fewest stones to make territory in the corner, a bit more to make territory on the sides, and you need most stones to surround territory in the center.  Playing in the center now is therefore bad. You're not attacking, or building a framework. Normal moves here are e3, f17, k3, k4, k17, k16 (marked on the board).
Remember, moves on the third line are for making territory. Here, you want to create a big framework (moyo) using the stones k10, r9 and q4. It's therefore better to play high, on the fourth line (at k4, for instance).
It's better to play at q14. The horse's jump shape (keima) has a  weakness, it can be cut.  You can also think about attaching at o16, to build a wall facing your r9 stone (and thus creating a big framework).
There is a proverb, which says: "Block at the larger side". Here, you're blocking in the wrong direction.  You have invested in the right side, by playing r9. When you play this move, you're giving that up, in exchange for a wall which will be facing white's o17 and k16 -- an useless wall. You should play r16 here, to make a wall facing your own stones. (see variation).
This hane is an overplay, it leaves too big a weakness at r13 and s12. You should just strech at r13.
It's better to just bite the bullet here, and to connect at r13. (see variation).
With this move you let yourself be cut at q15.
This is a bad result for black. white broke through into your framework, and split you into two groups, while taking a lot of territory.
This is a small move. You're not attacking anything, or making a lot of points. Try to keep an eye out for the large points on the board. A good rule is to play in the largest open area. You can think about f17, f3, q3 (takes corner and builds framework -- a very big move), j5 (makes framework).
By pincering like this you're giving white the chance to make easy life in the corner. The o3 stone is already pincered by J3. You should attack this stone by pushing it towards your j3 strenght (see variation).
Again, you're not blocking from the correct side. The proverb says: "Block from the largest side". See variation.
Okay, this is a good point to review the situation.  You have emphasized the center, whereas white has taken two corners, and built a framework on the left.   F7 is a key point now ; it finishes your framework. In my opinion, you should play there, and next invade into white's framework on the left.
You should be playing on the third line here. You want to make life as fast a possible, and reduce white by doing so. Moves on the fourth line are for reducions; it's when your stone has to run away quickly to the center, because it cannot make life. That is not the case here, the left site is full of holes, you can easily live there.   Moves which are probably better are c12, c10 or c8.  BUT: the VITAL point here is f6. You should play there! (see variation)
White is trying to kill your stone. This is an overplay. Your stone can easily live, and when it does, f12 does not serve any purpose anymore.
Good, cut, just run out.
This move doesnt serve a purpose. It is not attacking anything, and its not making any territory.  Moreover, it's bad shape. It's better to make a ponnuki at f13 if you want to play locally. But I would just tenuki, your group is quite safe now.
This is a very important point. You should have played here earlier. Your center moyo is severely reduced with this move.  It is a bit far though. White should probably have played on f6 (and black too!).
This is an overplay. You should aim to cut off the g6 stone from d6, because you want to preserve your center.
White has connected the e5 group with his g6 invasion. Your center is reduced to ruins.
This is a bad move which does not serve any purpose. It just strenghtens white. Always look at the possible answers for your move -- try not to "ask" your opponent to fix his shape for free.
White does have a cut at h7 now, which you exploited later ;]
Your central moyo has been reduced. Black does not have any areas where he can make a lot of points, while white already has four corners of solid territory. The game does not look good for black.  The main mistakes were:  - neglecting to play around f6 to close off the central moyo - the d7 overplay
An overplay. You're leaving too many cutting points.
White punished you for your overplay. Now b4 is a wasted move.
This is very small. You're not attacking anything. White should ignore this move.
Aargh !! Extremely slow!  You should have a feeling now that you're losing the game. you invested a lot of stones to make a moyo in the center, and now it's gone. You should play some active move, to try to come back in the game.
Very good ! White should have protected here earlier ;] Now you're back in the game.  The rest of the game is endgame. I think the most important points were in the opening and the middle stage fighting. See the first move for a summary.  This is the last comment.
why did white start? I thought black always started  As you are the weaker player (25k vs. 23k) you get two extra stones, which are placed in the corner. So you already "started" with two moves, which are done for you.  My english is not very good, so I copied this from Wikipedia:  Handicaps are given by allowing the weaker player to take Black, and declaring White's first few moves as mandatory "pass" moves. In practice, this means that Black's first move is to place a set number of stones (usually the number is equal to the difference in the players' ranks) on the board before allowing White to play. Traditionally, the hoshi ("star points") -- strategically-important intersections marked with small dots -- are used to place these handicap stones.
tried to block off territory in the upper-left corner  do you think this was effective?  No. Always try to play from the corners to the sides to the centre. The reason is, that it is much easier to get points in the corner as in the centre.
trying to prevent territory claim in center
how do you battle out an attachment?  You shouldn't attack if it is not necessary (for example to save a group). In this case you have a weaker position, as with every white move you lose one liberty and your opponent is always one move in front.
the attachment only made it worse for me…  Yes, there's no chance to win anything with this stone.
again, how do you battle out an attachment?  Even if your opponent didn't care about your attack, you'd need four stones to catch one.
Now it is hard for the marked stone to stay alive, as it is not connected to the group and white is strong there.
didn't see that coming  was there any way to prevent that?
Finally you try to get the corner.
several attempts to capture stones only made it worse off for me  Capturing stones is really not important, though it sure is great fun to capture a large group. Watch some games of really good players and you will see, that they hardly capture stones. Territory is much more important.  You can practice capturing in 9x9-games.
Good, now you have two eyes
AxSqrd [25k]: HA! Two eyes… :D poPoring [23k?]: nice
AxSqrd [25k]: Thanks…it happens rarely… ^^"
To get two eyes here, your opponent must be drunken. ;-) You need to place at least 8 stones to stay alive.
white has total control over the bottom  what is the best thing to do?  You will never be able to get the whole territory. So try to get territory where you are strong. In your case, in the upper left and right corner.
poPoring [23k?]: ahhh
didn't see that coming either… T_T
Very good! White didn't see that.
although i was quite happy with this move, i'm not sure if it was really helpful, even though i capped 15 stones
What did you try here?
this move too, helped  ;-)
Try to avoid that.
i would've been able to capture the marked stones (∆), except for my atari (O)…
MagmaFires: hi
B is playing high chinese fuseki. The most common respones for w: A, B and C. The idea of high chinese fuseki is to build moyo and if b gets a stone around A he builds a nice framework.  So I would prefer not to let b play his game and play A instead of shimari.
Not so sure about this move, i considered K17 at the time, but didnt want black to take the whole right side wihout resistance.    Usually r14 is played when b has a stone around k17. As a common principle you should make a kakari from the open side.  k17 looks a bit slow for me (b doesnt have to respond to it) that's why I would play A.
This move is strange. If you wanted to take corner you dont have to play r14 stone, directly 3-3, but the trade will be good for b as he's playing moyo oriented game.
S16 seemed strange to me at the time.   The whole variant is not common. But s16 is a shape move in this situation.
Here i felt the invasion was too deep into my territory and didnt want Black to settle a base easily.  In fact b doesnt need this invasion he should have just continued building moyo. Now you got a chance to attack weak b group and while attacking it to invade b's moyo.
When i reviewed the game afterwards i noticied that there is a cut starting with J13 that black failed to notice.   Yes, bad shape. S18 is slow, it's a yose move. A and B look like urgent moves otherwise b might defend his moyo.
This sequence seems a bit like spoiling aji as i didnt gained much from it.   Again yose move. Look at the whole board, invasion is a must now.
Since i had sente i decided to try to invade as black seemed to have more territory than i had. I also considered something like G3 instead.   G3 is slow and low in moyo game usually you want to play high moves around h4. But invasion is urgent. So r5 is a very good move.
Common pattern see the variation.
The idea is to make sabaki - a light group that can easily run and have an eye space. But your group is very heavy.
I usually see my opponents play p1 to make eyes here and with s3 open i thought i could kill the group... since this is a major turning point in the game... is it possible to kill black or i should had played something like M3 or n6?  Firstly you dont need to kill b. When you go for kill, you take all the risks. So I would think of reducing b's moyo instead.  It looks like b has enough space to make eyes. I dont see how you can kill it. Besides you have cut at n3 and because of k4 stone ladder doesnt work.
wrong move with q1 b lives unconditionally.
This cut was painfull... i read it out and thought it possible to save both groups at the same time.   Yes, very painful move, that because you went for a kill, now it looks impossible to save both groups.
After N1 i dont think i can approach the lower group anymore and both my groups were at danger. I played N4 to save what i could.   The feature of the corner that it dies very slwoly so any Semeai is good for b. n1 doesnt give b an eye.
After this sequence it looks like black shou
After this sequence i know i have lost more than what i won...   of course your group is dead and b's alive.
good move.
Passive but i couldnt afford to give away the corner to black.  Big move as there are no urgent moves it's a good one.
I think i won the game in these endgame moves where black just followed around.   True. You got a lot in yose b was passive maybe because he killed a group and was thinking he is ahead.
I saw the double atari but wasnt sure what was worth more.   You played right.
I think the wide pincer is not so good when b has the 3-4 in the lower left. I like A or B better
I think maybe b should stay in lower right here
maybe a lighter move is better here. keep b contained while making good shape
last two moves were big, but addressing this group is more urgent. B missed a chance when W played 22
this move doesn't look right. O16 better in this corner, but better to play around D7 i think.
good. addressing the running battle much more important than the upper left corner; B tenukied too soon
w should not extend so far if it can be cut since b has F16.
these last two moves look like b is solidly securing his lead on territory, but it is a little greedy since he still has weaknessess. most importantly, the big group in the upper right doesn't have any real eyes yet.
again, very slow. b can learn to "win a won game".
B need to read more carefull here and just connect to the lower group. his upper group is alive and territory lead secure.
stepwise [4k]: gg poleman [5k]: thx gg
z -- Hello, I am Bill, "zinger" in the internet Go community.  My comments are marked with "z --".  z -- I prefer to use move numbers and board markings in my comments, rather than grid coordinates.  Hopefully you have an SGF reader which displays these correctly.  I recommend Drago (www.godrago.net), which I used to make the review.  z -- Remember that I am also a weak amateur, and only a little stronger than you.  Be sure to check my comments with a critical eye.  Almost certainly, I have made a few mistakes.  z -- this was a fighting game.  Because of this, I don't have many strategic comments.  However, black missed several tactical chances which would have given him a better game, such as 45, 51, 61, and 75.  So based on this game, I would say you should work on your tactical fighting skills and tesuji.  z -- thanks for the game, and good luck!
z -- Before going forward, think about this: if white 4 was on the star point, would you play 5 at the 3-3 point underneath it?  Why or why not?
P: I know now that this is bad but I dont know why  z -- see next comment.
z -- the reason the marked exchange is wrong is that now white can block with 14.  The result is similar to a direct 3-3 invasion under a star point stone.  But that is bad to do so early, as I suspect you decided back at move 4.
P: I dont see this as playing near the force, because maybe q5 will not dead  z -- true, black 5 still has potential.  Still I think 17 is too close, I prefer A.
z -- very bad move
z -- I don't like 21 because it attaches to a weak stone.  This makes the white stones stronger, which in turn weakens 17 and 19.  I like 21 at A, B, C, or D better.
P: too far?  z -- I'm not sure.  Did you have a plan if white pushed and cut as A-B-C?
z -- 35 should be hane at A, I think.
P:G7?  z -- I think 37 is OK.
z -- 45 should connect at A.
z -- 46 and 48 are painful for black.
z -- 51 is not good.  White can still capture the marked stone if he needs to, so 51 doesn't do very much.  I think 51 should be at A or B.
P: too little  z -- yes, black is getting in trouble now, 45 and 51 are the reasons.
z -- 61 at A looks better.  This is a similar technique to the variation at 51, it's a good one to learn.
z -- ouch
P:Now I have two weak groups  z -- really three; see next comment.
z -- 72 should peep at A first.
z -- 74 is a big mistake.
z -- but 75 is also a big mistake.  It should be at A, which captures the three white stones.  This is a big missed opportunity - black could have turned two weak groups into one strong one, and taken several points in the process.  75 looks like a case of trusting the opponent too much: "he peeps, I have to connect".
z -- now black is back in trouble again.
z -- 81 just encourages white to split black with 82.  Unfortunately, I don't really see a good move for black.  This is what happens when you have three weak groups to the opponent's one.
z -- probably white should turn at A first, strengthening his only weakness.
z -- white should just play at A, or again turn at B.
93 leaves behind bad aji of a white peep at A.  Black should connect solidly at B.
z -- the black group is not alive yet.  White can kill it by playing at A.    z -- And even if black was alive there, the most important thing is still the weak groups.  There are three of them, two black and one white (assuming black is alive in the lower center).  That is a very urgent situation!  101 is trivially small in comparison.  Specifically, black should play 101 at B, C, or D, any of which have a chance to capture white, or a least make a fair fight out of it.
z -- 103 should hane at A to keep pressure on white's weak group.  Still, 103 carries a threat ...
z -- ... good so far ...
z -- ... but 109 is wrong.  Black should cut at A instead; see variation.
z -- I don't think white really needs to defend this corner.
P: I didnt see that. Now Im lost  z -- yes, that's the consequence of 93.  Last comment.
half [4k]: thx blas [4k]: thx
amph [2d]: hi
wakka [-]: what are some ways i should approach this?   erker: The white stone (c4) is one usual approach move to the marked black stone. A, B and C are the common responses.
erker: At this point Black can decide weather to get outward influence or the corner. The important thing to remember is to cut at the side you don't want: at A to get the outside, at B to get the corner. The reason is that White will capture the cutting stone, as not doing so will result in an inferior position
erker: As shown in the variation, if you want to keep the corner, the correct way is to play at A.
erker: Maybe it is easier to just enclose the upper right corner with A and build some territory for your own. See the variations for move 31 and my comment on move 43.
wakka [-]: some variations on how to handle this mabey.   erker: Black can attach at A or jump to B.  The attachment at A results in a similar constellation as the one in the game (Black lives on the side, White get outside influence), but with much better shape. But usually, Black don't want to help White in building outward influence, so jumping to B prevents this and leads to a fight.
erker: Good move. Next you can aim to play an extension to A; that would also reduce the influence of the thick white wall on the left.  But it's White's turn, so White will definitely play an extension as far as possible from his thickness on the left.  That is the reason why I don't like your approach move at B: after the white pincer (C) the jump to D is ineffective because of the strong white position in the lower left. And after E (or the sequence in the game) White get a thick position. Now Black needs two moves in a row: enclose the corner and counter the thickness with an extension.  Compare this position with the variation for move 29.
wakka [-]: is there a better way to reduce white than this?  if so please show variations   erker: First of all: your move is _not_ a reduction, it's an invasion. This distinction is not just a play with words, it has tactical and strategic consequences. An invading stone fights from inside the (potential) territory, it will be attacked, it has to make life or run into the open. In contrast, a reducing stone presses from the outside, the opponent has to defend.  Strategically, a reduction destroys less potential territory than a invasion, but the opponent can gain thickness by attacking the invading forces.  This is the reason why weak players fear invasions, they only see their territory vanish. But strong players enjoy being invaded because of the thickness they get in exchange for territory.  So invasions have tactical problems (to not get killed) and strategic problems (to not help your opponent).  Why is your stone an invasion? As a rule of thumb, connect the stones at the border of the potential territory (the two marked white stones in this case). If you're beyond this line, your opponent will most likely press from the outside, so your stone end as an invasion.   As White is strong in this area of the board and you're not, it's better to play a reduction (at A, stopping short before the border line). Regardless of White's answer, you can't get a bad result.
wakka [-]: as it might be obvios i'm not 1-3d, i'm sorry if this game bores you at all.
amph [2d]: np wakka [-]: ^_^
amph [2d]: do ur best
wakka [-]: i'm trying ^^
wakka [-]: ._.
erker: The usual response to the marked white stone attacking the marked black stones is at A. Your move tries to hard; to defend the side and the center.
wakka [-]: mabey the most efficient way to block this please   erker: Blocking at A is the obvious move, but it helps White to encircle the center (see variation). The marked black stone is clearly out of place
wakka [-]: wow, that's cool xD
erker: Bad. You're connection three worthless stones to a group that is in big trouble. Better get out into the open (at A?), quick!
erker: The exchange of Black A for White s9 clearly helps White to strengthen it's right site and does not get you any nearer to an eye.
erker: Your last moves only helped White. It's right side is now strong and your running group faces thickness from both sides.
erker: As long as this is a forcing move, it's OK. But don't try to live locally! Run into the open instead.  Why is running better than living? Assume the black group manages to live and White gets stones on the marked fields. The game would be over.
wakka [-]: is there a good way to handle this?   erker: Jumping to A, forcing White to play B only helps White, as White wants to play there anyway (connecting the white stone with it's friends). Therefore, I prefer C -- it pushes White in the direction there Black is strong.
I think I jumped out one space too far.  [CW] Not at all - this is a joseki
Should I have kept jumping out to the center?  [CW] Not necessarily, but if you want to settle in the corner, attaching at C17 is the standard method. H16 is also a big point here.
[CW] pushing from behind like this is usually a bad idea, especially if your opponent's stones are on the 4th line. If white plays J16 here it becomes a hard game for black.
[CW] Good move from white.
[CW] This is a painful exchange for black. Your position is very compressed, and you have strengthened white.
[CW] This is not usually a good a move. Can you imagine if white plays at B15? If you then connect at B16, white can pull back to B13 and it becomes hard for you. The situation is difficult for you, however, one eye appears to be the best you can do in this situation, so you will have to keep running.
Could my opponent have played a move to reduce my eyespace.  [CW] Yes - B15
was this good?  I was thinking of (e,4) too  [CW] This is ok. E4 is possible, on the theory that approaching corners is bigger than sides. the problem is that white is already quite strong there, so you can imagine fierce resistance, perhaps with some kind of pincer. Personally I like J16 or K16 to try and confine white to the corner.
[CW] This is arguably a bit small at this point of the game. White would rather have you approach so that you can attack.
I wanted to take the last big points  [CW] Sure - perfect for black now.
[CW] a bit slow from white
[CW] good!
[CW] a great result for black, although the cutting point is a concern.
was this good?  [CW] No - in general, attaching to your opponent's stones just makes them stronger. In certain cases what you're trying (to connect your groups) can work, but typically only on the 3rd line, and then only if hte stones are 3 stones apart, instead of 5.
[CW] Terrible move from white - absolutely cannot leave the battlefield.
[CW] white's tennuki's seems crazy. To invade where black is super strong is even a worse idea.
Should I have ignored this approach?  [CW] I think so. Your corner is huge now, and white will battle to settle on the top. However, white can still play K3 to connect, so perhaps L4 is more important.
[CW] white can settle by invading at R17.
was this a good cap?  [CW] Well, your territory is growing perfectly, so in that sense I can't criticise it. The cutting point at J15 is getting worrying, however.
[CW] It is hard to see what this achieves, but its hard to get two eyes here. See variation. Shows that white's invasion was crazy.
I tried really hard to keep white pinned up in the corner.  [CW] Nice idea, but doesn't really work. That cutting point will return to hurt you.
[CW] Ouch. And now your group on the left is in grave danger.
I don't think this move did anything.  [CW] I think it was important to make sure your group got out into the middle.
[CW] Not so great, there are more active ways to get two eyes. See variation.
[CW] Not so great. White can play B14 to threaten your eye space, and of course, can play A11 (and A18) in sente as huge endgame points.
Did I respond correctly?  [CW] I don't think so. You were lucky that white blundered. See variation.
[CW] White should play the ko. It could get very very hard for black. Now hopefully you can see why your descents to the edge (A17 and A12) are so bad.
[CW] Black has been reduced to one eye.
[CW]...again white loses the plot.
Did I play this sequence out well?  [CW] Not especially. See variation. White can easily live here with S11.
[CW] No good. S11 is the right move here.
Could white have still made life on the right side?  [CW] I think so. See variations.
[CW] This is a pass. White cannot separate.
Would ( H, 14 ) be a good answer  [CW] I don't think it would make any difference.
I dont think I should have allowed white to make that strong bamboo joint.  [CW] It depends on the plan. This bamboo joint doesn't actually achieve anything for white. Black needs that 2nd eye, however.
[CW] big point. The game is secure now, so long as your group on top left does not die.
[CW] This move is tiny. Worth at most one point.
[CW] White is driving black into his own territory. Something like F10 would be more natural.
[CW] Now black is 100% alive.
[CW] This move is worth -1 point, in gote. A11 is the obvious move.
[CW] Gives white an attractive target to attack. This would be a good way to lose the game.
Why did white play THAT move?  Seems unecessary.  [CW] wrong direction. H6 or thereabouts would be enough to turn the game around.
[CW] Now black is about 20 points ahead.
Why didn't cut?  A ladder would be good for white.  [CW] Very complicated. Could end badly for white. See variations. But under the circumstances probably worth trying, seeing as white is so far behind.
[CW] S17 doesn't quite work.
Exar [2k]: hi shuchan [3k]: hi
You can comfortably stretch along the fourth line on A. White has yet to prove that his wall will outperform your fourth line territory. Yes you can hane at the head of two, but these two are actually stronger than that: White has the tiger mouth at B in sente. This means that the cut at A is stronger than it may seem.
This move must be left unplayed. It doesn't increase the liberties of your stones and it forces White to make a connection. You hence only lose possibilities: the peep at A or possible ataris.
Good shape.
see var
See variation.
White's influence is comparable to Black's. Black has more territory in the corner and also sente. So, IMO, Black has a small advantage now.
Logical sente.
This is clearly too close to Black's thick wall.
Was this the right move? I didnt want to play k17 because I didnt want to play close to my thick wall in the right. Or is it sufficently far enough to warrent k17?  dv: I think you made the right judgment here.
Good.
This invasion is not consistent with your previous move, which was territorial. White has responded.  I think it is now time to play at the bottom.
A would be more efficient.
right move?  dv: one space jumps do not really attack. See variation.
A thank you move: you don't win any liberties and force White to connect.
How should I have handled this invasion?  dv: A secures the heavy group at the top. That will be best.
You must never leave a diagonal-straight opposition such as the marked stones alone. Either play A or B/C.
better at A
here i was blind, I didnt see the danger to my m18 group  dv: On the contrary: it is captured already, so there is no danger anymore. You correctly took his two stones on a large scale.
White now has the advantage. Maybe forcing at A first would be cleaner.
good rescue move - i did not see it
dv: Good, the capture is huge.
I felt that N8 was the only move. If i had let W play here, W will have some 30 points secure territory. Is N8 ok?  dv: Your move and A both reduce the moyo. Therefore I would play at the bottom (B). After your move, White still has chances to make much territory.
I think White should play at the bottom too.
right invasion point?  dv: it is ok. I would still go for a simple keima kakari, but it is definitely the right direction.
see var
The mistake here is very fundamental. You were in a crosscut in enemy influence. Your task is to sacrifice one part and save the other by doing so. Obviously you have more chances to save your stronger stone, which is the one at the bottom, having more space.  You defend and strengthen the weakest stone in the crosscut, which is good if you want to keep both.  So A would have been better.
The driving maneuver was nice, but you are in hostile environment with a heavy connected group.
A is better
It isnt a great turnout for B in the lower left. How could i have secured my group otherwise?  dv: The left side is very much unsettled. There may be a chance with A but this move can also work.
A is better I think
both should play on the left, making or breaking eyespace
idem
From these moves I gather this was a quick game  It is difficult to learn something about one's mistakes in quick game fights, so I will not comment on them.
You can see here that Black doesn't take time to count liberties. Otherwise this move wouldn't have been played.
This too is a wild cut without calculating risks and possibilities.
As an end result, Black obtains this intrusion, in exchange for a consolidated White lower left quarter. Black's efforts lacked planning and coordination.  No further comments. See beginning for an overall conclusion.
shuchan [3k]: oh >.> lol
Vasher [2d]: could have ignored as far as i can tell
Jewdan: This move you played is the exact move Kajiwara-sensei used as an example in the chapter as a move where a pro might say, "Move two lost the game." Harsh criticism, but I aim to be constructive.  The reason this move is so bad is because Black wants nothing more than to play moves like A or B (A is probably better) in response to your komoku (3-4). The arrangement of your komoku like this means that Black can take an ideal extension from his upper-right hoshi (4-4) while eliminating your ideal extension. This is the concept of "direction of play," and is masterfully explained in Kajiwara Takeo's book _The Direction of Play_ (his name, written in Western order, is Takeo Kajiwara), and I encourage everybody I review to buy and read his book.  A quick, free synopsis of the concept is that stones can be seen as having wills and desires. Stones have moves that should naturally follow and can be seen to complete the original moves. By playing in a stone's direction of play like this, you satisfy the stone and put it to optimal use. By playing on an enemy's direction of play, you make his stone unhappy and make in unoptimal.  How does that apply here? The direction of play for a hoshi stone is a far extension along the sides, and the direction of play for the komoku is to make a shimari at A, B, C, or D. By playing like this, you invite Black to not only satisfy his stone's direction of play, but also to refute yours.  Now, this is not an irrecoverable mistake. There are lots of examples of pro games where this is the second move; however, solid theory shows that this move is questionable. In the future, a better point to pick if you would like to play a komoku would be at S4 or D17, both marked with circles.
Jewdan: Note that, since the play in the upper-right is a hoshi, it is probably better for the kakari to be at Q5 (marked with a circle) to emphasize influence over territory.
how is my opening here?  Jewdan: Not too bad, despite my railing against your second move. However, Black has the opportunity to play at A or B to start mokuhazushi (3-5) joseki that will likely benefit him in the upper-right. This is not something I would personally allow, but this is probably a matter of personal preference as opposed to go theory.
i don't know how to handle something like Black 7 after playing this kind of kakari. what's wrong with the way i'm handling things?  Jewdan: This hasami (pincer) is standard, though it may not be a good choice for Black here. The best response locally is C3; see the variation.
Jewdan: You do have the freedom to leave, but realize that you can't do well in both corners. You have to pick one or the other...  (My advice: you probably don't want to leave after the pincer.)
Jewdan: There are a few problems with this move:  1) Black's last move was not standard joseki. If White responds to the mistake, White stands to profit a bit extra. If White does not respond, Black's mistake becomes a good move. White should almost certainly respond at R2; see the variation on this move.  2) In this situation, the best local move is jumping into the san-san (3-3) at A; one of the things Kajiwara-sensei does in _The Direction of Play_ is explain why this move should not be considered joseki. Black can crush White in a fight here.  3) Allowing Black to extend along the bottom in this corner will likely hurt your lower-right stones.  See the variation on this move to see what you probably should have done.
this move seems odd to me. i forgot exactly why i played here. i think it's because i either wanted a large side on the bottom or a corner.  Jewdan: It does seem odd; it may have been a misclick for F3? However, White has a bad position in the lower-right since Black stands to take influence in the center and right with the hane at A on top of the 10 moku he has in the corner. I believe that it is urgent to prevent that from happening at all costs, and P6 (marked) seems the best way to do this. Black will almost certainly reply with a joseki in the lower-left to try to approach as close as possible to your lower-right group, but that cannot be helped.
Jewdan: I'm not certain this is the best line of play. Black is leading territorially, and though you make a large framework with this sequence, the sequence is gote, so Black can then take the large hane at A.  See the variation on this move for an interesting idea (though I cannot say that it really is better).
what's the best way to handle something like Black 23 in this case?  Jewdan: This move is impertinent and greedy; it's an overplay. With absolutely no support, Black dove straight into the middle of your strength. The best way to handle this is to respond with strength; if you do so, you are almost guaranteed to get a better result than if he had not invaded in the first place.  I think you picked the best move, actually. I tried some other plays that my instincts led me to assume were better, but this play has the best result... if followed up correctly.
Jewdan: Here is the mistake that allowed Black to get a good result. The L4 stone is nearly irrelevant to this fight; the focus is on the N3 group (marked). If you capture these stones, Black will have a hard time trying to save L4, and good play would lead him to let them die naturally while only threatening to save them.  See the variation for the correct response.
i'm not sure how to save the four white stones on the bottom right (or if i should even bother saving them at all).  Jewdan: It is possible to try running with the stones, but that is more likely to hurt than help you. For now, it's probably best to trade M6 (A) for N6 (B) and then tenuki (play elsewhere), probably at Q11 (C). The stones will likely die naturally through this sequence, but leaving the aji (potential) to live is important.
Jewdan: Another greedy move. Black has little to gain by adding another group to worry about, and he actually endangers his important group by driving White out like this. He should play simply at M6 (A) to help his group out.
there's definitely a better move somewhere. i just keep giving black points in the following sequence.  Jewdan: Allowing Black to capture the stones from the past few moves in unacceptable. You have to keep up the flow with M8 (A).  Now, don't expect to capture either of the groups at this point, but you can expect that Black will not gain much for his efforts. It is true that both players have two weak groups, but White has two advantages:  1) "A weak group between two weak enemy groups is a strong group." Your splitting group gains strength from simultaneously attacking two groups, so it is not in much danger.  2) Your group on the right, in the process of the fight, will form a base naturally on the right side and live.  So, despite all the work Black has put in to destroy your territory, he will gain nothing for himself while destroying the right side where he was dominating.
Jewdan: This is an unfortunate move. This tenuki not only gives Black your important cutting group, but fails in the only purpose I can see for it (trying to connect the right group out). M8 (A) is the only option here.
Jewdan: This move seems like a panicked response. There is nothing to be done to save these stones, so moving here is only giving him more points. If you want to continue playing, help out your lower-right group.
how do you feel about this move?  Jewdan: Fine, thanks for asking ;)  White needs to form a base with no risk of being cut, and the two-point jump/keima here works great. White's not out of the woods yet, but this helps the position.
Jewdan: The sequence from this move to move 60 should not have been played by either side. Black plays endgame moves in the middle game, and White makes matters worse by responding to those moves. White should have left to kakari at O17 (A) in every move in this sequence, and Black should have played K16 (B) or F17 (C) for his moves.  It seems as though you were worried about connecting your lower-right group to your bottom group. Note that you failed to do so, and that there is no way for you to have succeeded. Despite this, the group lived just fine. This is proof that Black played poorly by playing in this sequence, and that you should have left.
Jewdan: This tsuke (attachment) should only be played when Black cannot play the hane at R8 (A) due to a bad result. After Black 'A', White plays 'B', Black 'C', White 'D', and Black 'E'. If White's stone at 'D' were not at risk to be cut off, doing damage to Black's territory, or helping White live, then this result would be bad for Black. However, the stone is worthless, so Black can play the hane without hesitation.  I think that the best response is a move like Q13 (F). Black cannot cut White's shape, so White should concentrate on expanding his base.
Jewdan: The result of this sequence is bad for White. If Black had not messed up later in the game, Black would have successfully secured the right side. Rather than playing 'A', White should have connected with 'E' immediately to leave Black with less power with which to attack.
Jewdan: It is best to save this move as a ko threat. Note that it is gote; after Black connects at L2, you need to connect at K2 at some point to prevent a disaster on the bottom. A play like M10 (A) or P11 (B) is desperately needed.
Jewdan: You cannot afford this move now. White's lower-right group is in desperate danger.
Jewdan: This is a weird move. Black should reflexively keep up the attack on White's group with N12 (A) and make a large moyo on the top. This move does not help Black locally or globally, so I can only call this a mistake.
Jewdan: There is still nothing larger than running with your lower-right group.
i'm not satisfied at all with this move. i guess i played it because i was panicking.  Jewdan: It's the right idea, though M10 or P11 might be better.
how do you feel about the next 5 moves?  Jewdan: Move 84 was fine, 86 was too high, and 88 may be overextended.
Jewdan: The joseki is at A or B, and A is correct for this position.
Jewdan: Even if 86 were at A, this move should probably only be at B. You played too close to Black's strength here.
i am thinking this is the result of white 88. what would be a better placement for white 88?  Jewdan: If 86 were at A and 88 at B, this move wouldn't be good. Unfortunately, you've given Black room to devestate your territory.
i'm not sure what to do next here and during the following moves. i was basically just trying to reduce black as much as i could.  Jewdan: It seems best to play A to help out your lone White stone on the top and attack Black's group.
i feel as though white 98 doesn't belong here. where is a better place?  Jewdan: K11 (A) is probably better. You're in the unfortunate situation of having to worry about two groups simultaneously, and it's important that you correctly pick which one is better. You had the right idea here.
Jewdan: This move makes living difficult. I would clamp with L11 (A) instead; try to read continuations.
Jewdan: This move should have been the death of your dragon. White does not even have an eye yet (there's a ko at the bottom of the board), and as Black shows with his next move, this move does not help make eyes. You should play at M10 (A) to start a sequence to live in sente.
Jewdan: This is the correct local move because White cannot make his dragon live (save for Black's mistakes). However, it is proper to resign when you are losing like this.
in the next 15 or so moves, black gives up these four stones. was this the correct choice for black? suppose he did not intend to give up these four stones, how could white have played to ensure a lesser loss?  Jewdan: Black made a terrible mistake; White's dragon should die here. However, this hane enables White to capture the four stones. Black needed to play A or B to end the game, but he played another greedy move.
Jewdan: Black has been killed, so this move is an overplay. Playing S16 (A) captures more stones and causes further damage to Black's territory in the corner.
given the situation on the left side, i feel as though this stone was poorly placed. where do you recommend i play white 136?  Jewdan: Right where you did. This is an excellent reducing move. You can't play any lower than this, nor can you play closer to the Black stones this move pressures.
Jewdan: Loosely connecting here with F12 (A) seems to be a better move.
what is a better way to handle this?  Jewdan: This line of play is fine.
Jewdan: 'A' is the correct play. See the variation to see how this would likely turn out.
Jewdan: The best you can do now is to save the three marked stones with 'A'. See the variations.
Jewdan: You really need to play 'A' to salvage something in this position.
Jewdan: This move only hurts you. It is better to play H16 now.
how do you feel about the following few moves?  Jewdan: This is a good move, and the sequence that follows is also good.
Jewdan: It is better to play at 'A' instead. While Black may hane at this point to reduce you, it is only reverse sente for him to do so. Meanwhile, you leave the opportunity open to play 'B' in sente. Dropping down like this is just gote.
Jewdan: There is nothing that can be done in this region, but I can't blame your desperation.
Jewdan: This is a mistake. Black needs to connect at 'A'. See the variation.
Jewdan: It would be better to play sente plays like 'A' now.
Jewdan: You have a seki in the bottom-left with the play at 'A', which means that he would only get one point in that area for capturing the marked stone (since, in Japanese rules, nobody gets points in a seki). It's not enough to change the fact that you lost, of course, but it would be enough to swipe the smug look off of that bully's face.
playing on the edge of the board cannot help you secure territory - later in the game you will play on the edge to finish the boundries of your territory or connect groups, but not now
it's also a good idea to play far apart early in the game, to influence as much of the board as possible
black is overconcentrated in the top-left and letting white have free reign bottom-right  remember that to win you must have at least one more point than your opponent
too little too late for black in this corner, I'm afraid
again on the edge - not good
the 2nd line isn't much better than the edge - F3 would be a much better move
the C3 invastion MUST be answered!  - C4 is good - maybe you can kill the invasion?
again black has abandoned a corner to white (bottom-left)
now black has a nice wall - looking good!
if you were white, where would you play next?  F4, yes?  I think the black play here is F4 - or D10 to try to take the whole left side
F2, G3 and H4 have too many cutting points - they aren't doing black much good here
danger - E5 is a cutting point and not that big a deal, ntil the F6 cutting point is created with this move - E6 would  have been a better move for black, so protect the cutting points - if white now plays D5, black is in atari and after that white can play C4 to capture the 3 stones
a ladder is only a ladder if the white stones are in atari - black's shape just keeps getting worse plaing this way
double atari
again with the weak shape, with lots of cutting points
this move does black no good - white already has two eyes and thus cannot be killed, and black cannot make two eyes in there - K5 would be good for black - or E6
white doesn't need to play in here either, incidently
black continues to play self-atari moves that do no good - white could simply ignore
an excellent move!  the weak shapes are still there, however, so white can shred black on teh bottom
double atari
again, an excellent move - in fact it's a big move - and there's a go proverb that says "Play urgent moves before big moves."  E6 is urgent  the group at L3 is already dead, so good to forget about it
black is very strong on top  which means it's not a good idea to play on top!  D10 would be bigger, when thinking about the whole board   and I'm still worried about E6
see the shape black is creating again?   with the cutting points?
there it is - I think white is better off with E5 instead, but that's just me
self-atari
again, too close to black's strength
D5 seems natural, to try to keep those stones alive and build something along the left side - E11 is also claiming territory, but giving up what's already there
this isn't needed from white - R12 better
again on the edge - bad news
double atari
edge plays to not enclose any territory
again wtih the cutting point - play D9 instead
excellent!  this is the first move of the game where black has protected a cutting point
see all the cutting points?
a white mistake - F8
why give up your stones?
you're seeing the cutting points now?
black's moves are futile inside white's stronghold
self-atari
L11 better
cutting points again
in this case, black is protecting where there is no cutting point - do you see what I mean?    defend the corner! - R16 is the move
Q19
self-atari in the corner - S17 would kill white
double atari again
not needed
not needed
futile
not needed  Overall, black played lots of strong moves, on big points.  The idea of playing away from the action is an excellent skill to develop, playing those big points.  And, must play urgent points first.  The reason black was shredded is because of all the cutting points.  Email me back if you have any more specific questions, or want to know where I would play as black on a particular move.
Hello reviewer, I play black in this game and I had lot of problem during opening.
buckyyowza: so far so good!  R16 and Q14 make a good solid shape.  I would treat your pincer stone as a sacrifice for now, draw play away from this area and use its aji later on when it becomes useful.  Here I don't know how to play
buckyyowza: this is ok, though I think S17 is more efficient.  Here, white is splitting the corner and black should get sente.  In general the fewer moves during opening the better, as the more it is played out the less aji is left in the situation.  is this ok?
buckyyowza: black is better to stay thick on the right side than to become enclosed in the corner.  This line of play allows white to gain thickness and sente, which is not good considering black has left an empty corner.  I would prefer black to play at R15 now
buckyyowza: agreed, this result favors white, though if black plays M14 now it is not a huge advantage... just loss of sente.  result is not good for black
buckyowza: black should jump out at M14 now.  the upper side stones need to be developed a little more before tenuki. R6 is overplay in the lower right.
buckyyowza: simply L17 is more efficient.  O16 is aji keshi.  guess Black need to play one more move
buckyyowza: not necessarily, though black loses sente so has to come back to it later. see var.  Black is sealed off by white
buckyyowza: D6 is better here.  D7 is only good for developing into the center, but black doesn't need to be concerned about that.  solid play to settle stones faster during this phase of the game is key to getting ahead in a middle-game fight.
buckyyowza: K4 is beautiful! ;-)  C11 is too slow, I think. As black now, I would like to make a few more sente moves in the center, then invade at E16.  Is K4 ok or I should play C11?
buckyyowza: though it seems the thing to do, this is no good for black. white gets a nice wall and black's stones become split into two weak groups in white's sphere.  In fact, I would suggest that this move is where black starts to lose this game.
buckyyowza: this forces white to cut black off.  see var.
buckyyowza: white is too big now!
buckyyowza: this is too hard with the k17 wall, better to play at C17 now.  black can not survive running toward the center with this much white thickness working against him.
buckyyowza: this is a mistake by white.  black has no eye-space, so D13 is best keep black small and suffering.  With F15, white is giving black an opportunity to build good shape.
buckyyowza: black truly has no where to go in this direction, though trying to run is good for building eyespace.  Since white left it wide open, I would work on building at least one eye on the left side first. D12 or C13 look like better options.
buckyyowza: overplay by white!  simply K11 is enough to keep black in.  Now black can jump out to K12 and run to freedom.
buckyyowza: black has an interesting opportunity at C18 here, see var.
Black is ok at this point I think
buckyyowza: I prefer R4 here. white is easier to contain if the right side moyo stays solid.
buckyyowza: too conservative!  black is very thick here so white should be cut at every opportunity. Q5 is a perfectly OK play, see var.
buckyyowza: R9 is urgent for black now.
buckyyowza: actually, R9 was needed instead of P10 to save the R6 stones. It is trying to save the R6 in the next moves that loses the game for black.  Nonetheless, I will end my review here.  Black lost this game early by starting fights before a framework for fighitng was truly in place.  I would suggest keeping a couple of simple rules of thumb in mind early in the game and see if you improve ;-)  - play big points in sente, then tenuki - if playing in gote, settle your stones in the simplest way possible.  For example, play M14 at #18 instead of tenuki. - do not leave weak groups without enough compensation, only tenuki in sente!  If you can settle your groups and keep sente, then you will win without trouble... unless of course your opponent also settles his groups and keeps sente ;-)  I hope you have found my comments to be of use!  Please let me know if you have any further questions about this game.  ... This is greedy and I lost by this move?
teddy99 has resigned the game.
khebo [4k]: hi
RickMott: Maybe this pincer is bad?  Normal extension to Q6 better?  Pincer is OK, in this way Black exploits the advantage of being the first to kakari. Which pincer is best is another matter, and not so easily answered. K3 seems simplest in that W cannot make a 2 space extension anymore, and F3 - K3 are in a reasonable positio w.r.t. each other. For the double kakari as an answer to K3, see variation (jantje)
It is better for W not to play this now, leaving the 3-3 point open for invasion.
RickMott: I am weak in joseki.  I didn't like this situation.  I came out of this OK in the end, but please suggest a better line of play.  Joseki can only take you so far, I doubt whether there is any book that gives the answer in this particular situation. Leaving the corner to its fate does not seem wise to me. See variation. (jantje)
There's a proverb that warns you not to "push into the knight's move (keima)". I cannot find anything better than the variation. (jantje)
RickMott: Phew.  Pretty sure if white just pulls back at P2 he can kill me.  Quite right (jantje)
The result is bad for Black since the two stones O6 are worthless, the corner is small and the White stones are quite thick (jantje)
Probably an overplay as demonstrated by White's excellent reply (jantje). Better at A.
The extra strength White has gained in the centre is worth more than the few points Black has taken on the right side (jantje)
RickMott: Mistake here, I think.  The 2 stones aren't important.  Better to take a big point on the left side or do something (what?) in the upper left.  Agree, C17 suggests itself (jantje)
Here it is! (jantje)
Joseki is A, in fact C16 is thought to be less than optimal because of it. "Please explore the variations by yourself" (jantje)
Interesting move that in the later course of events will turn out to be very good. See comment at move 66 (jantje)
RickMott: Now they've turned into cutting stones, so I think I have to save them.  Running fight develops.  Oops! What happens to your cutting stones when W plays n7 now? Luckily he misses it. So you must play A here.(jantje)
Black has comfortably escaped; White now echos Black's mistake of a few moves ago by starting to run with garbage stones (jantje)
Quite the wrong idea, A for example is much better (huge sente move, note that Black B is gote now).  It is interesting that it is the marked stones that make A sente for White. These, again, are on the board because Black started to run out from O7.  (jantje)
Threatening the white stones from afar, good thinking!  See the variation for another way to implement the same thought (jantje)
Black got more than he had a right to expect here, his game has markedly improved.  White has done himself no favor by creating a weak group (jantje)
RickMott: Not sure what's the biggest move now, but this probably isn't it.   Reduce White's left-side moyo?  If so, where?  Does the bottom group still need a defensive move?  I think the bottom group is alive, but that E2 is sente against it. This in turn means that you should not go C3 now. This leaves A and possibly B as invasion points. For judging the move you actually played, answer 2 questions: did it gain you something? did you come out with sente? (jantje)
Time to answer the two questions. You did end with sente, and the ponnuki around K16 will help in invading the left side. On the minus side, White's centre group is not weak anymore. So the merits of your previous moves will be decided by what you now can do on the left side. (jantje)
This should not have been enough for Black, but White now makes a huge mistake (jantje)
White is giving away the big to preserve the small. In fact he has a win here, see var. (jantje)
There's also a proverb that warns against 'pushing the cart from behind' as White now find himself forced to do (jantje)
What happens after Black A?  (it leads to a ko, not necessarily good for Black) (jantje)
A is urgent (jantje)
The final game-losing error. White can live or connect when he starts with A instead (jantje)
B is ahead by at least 20 points now! (jantje)
A bad overplay, White is getting desperate and rightly so (jantje)
Full of sound and fury...  But how about Black A now? (jantje)
Still, this move is big enough to compensate for anything W has gained by his overplay (and Black's mistake in answering it)
A is bigger (jantje)
Why not A? (jantje)
Unnecessary, a free gift of 3 points (jantje)
And exactly what does Black have here if White does not connect?  Gote moves of negative worth are to be avoided (jantje)
A is still better (not that it matters) (jantje)
The White reply shows that A is better (jantje)
RickMott: Unnecessary? Yes (jantje)
Good direction. P17 is perfectly good too.
> This move is not so good for w. See variation for joseki
>This is good shape, but a bad move. Understanding why this is a mistake will make you stronger! I've put in a few variations to have a look at.  The biggest problem is that it misses an opportunity. Black needs to cut here and fight. The corner is alive without this move.
>Should be Q18. This move loses liberties and actually means that b will have trouble cutting anywhere any more, despite all white's cutting points, because his own shape in the corner is bad.
> The shape in the top right is horribly unfinished. It should feel very strange to play anywhere but in the top right! Unfortunately black has filled up his own liberties so there isn't anything he can do. Also, there's nothing w can do to the corner. Therefore tenuki is actually not bad, but the aji up there should always be on your mind.
> A good solid move
White can't do anything until black has fewer liberties. It would be better to leave this for now.
> A bit of an overplay by w, especially as the cut at P4 is still there.
> This is ok too, although a bit passive
Smarre [1k]: This is way too good for white, corner and strong group  > P5 at Q5 is ok
> Should be the variation
>Good. Now b has no leverage which he can use to catch up.
> Not dynamic enough. Black won't catch up with moves like this. See variation.
> A bit deep. A chance for black!
> Good
> You can lean on the left and play more aggressively
> Black's attack is over, and there isn't much to be done now except cross your fingers and jump deep into the right side
>Last chance! A good (but risky) invasion point, which w needed to defend after L11, but w might get enough compensation to win anyway.
> Not good shape here - white can just cut. Compare with white playing F15. Last comment until the end
> Probably a good resignation. I've marked a few rough territory sizes on the board (I hope they show up ok on your computer!). Without komi, I think black is about 10-20 points behind; check yourself and see if you agree. This isn't a large amount, especially as there's a lot to be claimed in the centre, but black's floating centre group is going to hinder him while w has no weaknesses.  A good game! As I said, feel free to email or catch me on KGS.
I will not comment every move you make. I think it is good to have in a review a few central topics.   1) Sometimes you make a so called 'thank you move'.  Thank you moves are sente moves that are not good for you, but are good for your opponent. When you make a move and your opponent answers this move, then you gain something and your opponent gains something else. A sente move is good if you gain more than you opponent. With a thank you move your opponent gains more. Compare a 'thank you move' with 'Spit me in my face or I will shoot you.'.  2) Play non-contact moves when you are attacking.  3) Fight your own plan. Do not always answer your opponents moves.
A strong player says told me that playing s 8 here connects the two groups, yet I cant seem to find how and always end up being cut.   This is a good move! Why? See variaton move 21.
..usually this way..
This is a thank you move. You are helping your opponent to connect. See variation for a better move.
Lucky me ^^  Good for you!!!
I prefer an other move.  The black group at the right side is alive.  White O10 is not really an attacking move, so you can  choose to play somewhere else. E.g. D5 is an interesting point for black, see variation move 33.  Do not always answer your opponents move. Fight your own plan! After O10 you have the chance to do so.
Too shy!  If you want to play in this area, play O11. Q11 is not really a weak point for you, see also variation move 35.
Good move
Good move.
A thank you move. Black gets only few points. White gets more at the lower side of the board.  The marked black stones (triangle) are all alive and connected. E.g. if white attacks with Q5 or O5, it is easy for black to stay connected. P4 would be a good move if you had problems with the connection between the marked stones. Now you make white stronger with P3 and also your own group (but your group doesn't need reinforcement)  When you are attacking your opponent usually non-contact moves are the best. When you play around or on the marked places (circle) you attack the white stones and you get more in return (controll over some part of the lower side).
cluelessj: I feel this was a mistake, I was aiming at o3  When we look at the moves 41 till 50 then we can conclude that white gained more than black.  White does make territory and a very strong group at the lower side. Black has a strong group after move 50, but on the other hand that was also the fact before move 41. So little improvement for black; also blacks territory isn't really bigger after move 50 than it was before.  If you want to attack, you usually need non-contact moves.   Good option: Explore an other part of the board: there it is a lot easier to make points. If you have a strong group, you can leave it alone and make points on an other part of the board. Marked places (circle) are possibilities to make points elsewhere.
Please look again at the moves 41 till 50. White gained more than black.
I prefer D11.  C16 is also on the third line. C10 is too close to the black wall.
This is a thank you move.  This move is sente for you, but it is not a good move for you. It is a good move for you opponent.  Without  black E16 the white group has a weakness at A. After black E16 and white D17 the white groups hasn't got a weakness.   What does white gain by E16 and D17? Well, white defends his weakness!  What does black gain by E16 at this moment? Almost nothing! E16 does not kill a white group or take territory.  The marked black stones (triangle) have lost a liberty. The group of two stones had got 5 liberties, the group now has got only 4 liberties.   Note that this is NOT the moment to play A! It is to early in the game to do so. But maybe later, if you get a black stone on or near B, then you can play A. If white answers A with D17, you can connect A with B.  Summary: Black plays a sente move, white defends a weak point, black gains (almost) nothing and loses a liberty. That's better for white!  Remember: Not all sente moves are good moves.
Good
This is a very important move for white: G14 is interesting for black.
This isn't a good move.  1) You cannot cut.  2) You upper side doesn't become stronger.  3) You force white to take a liberty from the marked group (triangle). The marked stones become weaker, by losing liberties.   Better moves are: F13, F5 or L10
Two weak points (triangle marked places)
B14 is better. The shape is better.
It is usually moves like thisby white  that cause me to lose the game, sure enough, the same thing happened here, in fact  my group was even killed :(.
F10 doesn't have enough room to live inside the black moyo. White F10 has to connect.   White does have three options (the marked stones). It is very hard to block all the three connections at the same time.  So you strategy is not to block all the possible connections. Your strategy is to gain something while attacking. See the variations move 101.
I was not trying to kill white, just make white run for a bit trying to stake myself out a little bit in the centre
This is not a good move, it makes white stronger!
This is not a good move.  Black has a bad shape (empty triangle).  You cannot cut white.
With black 1 you force white to play 2.  2 is an attack on the marked black stones (triangle). 2 makes it for white easier to connect his two groups.  So you force your opponent to attack your stones!   It is hard to say what is the best move in this situation, but it is better to play somewhere on the square marked points, because: 1) it does help the marked black (weak) stones 2) it keeps the white groups apart.  It is not bad for you if white connects F10 with his stones at the top. If you can kill the marked white stones in return, it is good for you.  I hope you get the idea: you cannot break every white connection, but if white connects somewhere you have to get something in return!
This move doesn't help black.
White becomes stronger in the center and because of that the black stones become weaker. So you again are helping you opponent
The marked white stones are allmost save.  White has two options: -connect at F7 or -kill the black stones in the center.  It is very hard for black to block both.
See variation
The black stones in the center are lost. White has a strong wall looking in to the black left side.  You cannot save your stones in the center. The square marked stone is very interesting for both players.
Not good.  You force white to run in your upper side. Better is L13 or M14.
This is an attack on the marked black stones.
There he is. You should have played here yourself after losing the center.
I do not mind losing but it is just so frustrating to keep losing this way ^^ Especially when things are ok at the start.   Summary: 1) Try to avoid "thank you moves".  Ask yourself: what do I gain, what does my opponent gain?  You have to gain more than your opponent!!!  2) Play non-contact moves when you are attacking.  3) Fight your own plan. Do not always answer your opponents moves.  I hope you will enjoy go as much as I do!!! It is a very interesting game to play and I hope you will have lots of fun with it in the future.
ufo: Hi, im your reviewer. Please note that im no expert on joseki. I will try to give some hints though. Im about 5k on KGS and 8k EGF, so I'm no senseis...;-) Don't blindly believe what I say.  This is considered bad for white, since it is to early in the game. As a general concept try not to get closed in by your opponent. Here white is obviously getting closed in without need. There are other free corners.  The outside influence will be benificial for B. This kind of stuff might sound a bit irritating if you hear it to much without knowing how to use that influence. Basically, it will pay for itself. You don't have to cash it immediately.  In general it will help you to play more efficient, because large connected groups are more efficient in making territory than locked in groups. It will also help you in fights, as the proverb says "large groups don't die". Obviously, the larger a group is, the more places it might help other groups connect to it, more places where it's influence might be used to cut opponents groups etc...
ufo: oops, there is no need to weaken yourself and create a cutting point. The second line is not good for white to crawl further on. It is called the line of defeat. The reason for A is that otherwise Black can play there in sente making a very good shape. Other than that it is bad for W.  B is the normal answer.
ufo: now you have three cutting points already. See variation.
ufo: this is not common. A is the normal respons which leaves endgame potential for white. This line of play lets black completely close their wall.
ufo: I would consider A or B here to defend the cut a little wider. I think i would choos B because it defends 2 cuts.
ufo: good, extend from your wall.
ufo: good again. Let's evaluate. White has 9 points in the lower left. Black has a huge double wing formation. Black is definitely on the better hand. White will have to invade, which means playing near you thickness, which is ineffecient.
ufo: with all modesty, I think this is the wrong side. Playing at A would allow white to develop in the open space at the right, which puts some pressure on the the stone at Q15 and separetes it from it's ally at the bottom right. Its also violating the play away from thickness principle. This way, white creates more weak groups allowing black to keep everything connected.
ufo: this move is usually played when you have a stone around A. When W plays O4 and later has to make base, they find themselves overconcentrated. The advantage you have made is by stopping W from extending to C and thus reducing your corner, or making the corner a bit harder to invade. In this case, it seems that are not your priorities...  I might have played a pincer at D or E.
ufo: Now it is a bit inconvenient to pince, because white can start to close in your corner by playing at A and you'll be facing a difficult fight in the corner. This is really a basic rule: Don't have your corners enclosed, and enclose  your opponents if you can.   Also I would play B instead of k3 since you are playing quite close to the big wall and not putting enough pressure on the white stones.
ufo: this seems a bit to sweet for my taste. I would hane. (attach-hane). Of course 25 min sudden death could lead to a safer style of playing i suppose.
ufo: A is still the direction. The four white stone at the bottom are obviously overconcentrated.
ufo: I have never seen this. You invest 2 moves in this corner vs white's one, and you still leave them A to grab the corner?  B or C are more common joseki. If you want to maintain more flexibility, it might be an idea to split the last unfinished corner in the top left, but before all that, D is absolutely mandatory. Urgent moves before big moves. Especially after the developments on the bottom, white's group is overconcentrated, so it is not effecient for making points, but it might be well suited for fighting...
ufo: I don't like this move. W does not gain anything. I would first get out at A, and later aim at B. Here this makes bad shape by pushing into your opponent while making them stronger.
ufo: This is gote. don't answer. Later in the endgame white might capture the stone in a sequence A-B, but that is often gote again, if black has developped more strength on the right by then.
ufo: See variation
ufo: good
ufo: in fuseki, the second line is usually no-go zone... try to develop your group a bit higher like in the variation.
ufo: See Var.
ufo: Such middle game fighting is always very difficult. Im not very good at it either. I've always seen it done at A instead of R5. Don't ask me definite follow up's, but it seems to me that B should now cut at A to prevent being locked in, giving white yet another isolated group that will have to live on the side. Note that the white group at the bottom is not yet compeletely alive and that making black stronger at A is bound to have some costs at later times...
ufo: Are you sure the corner lives? Because if you would happen not to come out this fight in sente, white might attack it...
ufo: what does this move do?  The exchange makes white stronger and you weaker...
ufo: This is even worse. lose one liberty and fortify the white group...
ufo: This is no time for tenuki. The white group is not alive, neither is the black corner, and black has a lot of cutting points.  white has so many possibilities here... I don't know which is best. I would say, preferably kill the black corner, and if not, catch a black group on the outside.  I don't immediately find a definite way to kill the black corner, so here are some variations on how white could attack the outside...
ufo: I wonder what this move does??? White is unconditionally alive already, so throwing stones inside won't change that.
ufo: likewise, i would prefer A. The second line is endgame.
ufo: This pushing into the opponent is bad style. Jumping to A seems much more interesting. Amongst other benefits A gives you a better chance at closing in the white group.
ufo: bad, don't push into your opponent if the only result is you losing liberties.
ufo: After reducing your own liberties, maybe better connect at A.
ufo: How do you feel about this exchange now?
ufo: This is obviously dame. You are cutting a live group from a live group.
ufo: Playing at A instead will make the endgame move at B gote for white.
ufo: Now, some endgame basics. This move doesn't threaten much at all, so take sente points... Have a look at the consequences of any of the marked points...
ufo: Even A is better.
ufo: tenuki!
ufo: 1 point in gote!
ufo: good!
ufo: dame
ufo: this is gote. keep getting sente points first.
ufo: gote again. Last comment.  Conclusion:  * Don't get your corners and other groups enclosed by the opponent, and enclose theirs. * Don't push into your opponent for the sake of reducing your own liberties. * Study the endgame. ( elementary go series has a good book on the endgame, that I read when I was about your level) * Remember that it is a game about life and death, and not about points. Don't take so much chances with weak groups and corners. * For white, it is considered bad manners to try and win on time in the end of a sudden death game.
I've recently played far too many san-ren-sei games and decided to try the high chinese instead.  ===  I almost always play the chinese opening as black (usually the low version), and I've found it helpful as a way of thinking differently.
K4 seems better in hindsight.  ===  I'm not sure, K4 isn't joseki that I know of, but it is better in fitting with the fuseki style. See variation.
===  Whoa, wrong idea completely.  The idea is that the Q9 stone functions as an existing (very loose) pincher, and you should press white into your strength to gain. See variation
===  He broke from joseki, he was supposed to cut at O14. It is good for you that he didn't cut, since the top isn't as big for white. Black has to worry about white cutting at O14, since white P17 at this time has weakened them.
===  Almost always extend, see variation. Worse case scenario, you lose an extra stone, after white plays one extra stone (so no point difference), but what will probably happen is black will get several outside forcing moves in sente while white has to keep adding moves to kill
I got a nice influence in the center and white got the corner.  ===  Your influence isn't perfect yet, the O14 cut it still a problem (albiet not as big of one as before).
The left side started to look too large if white played around here...  ===  This seems like the best move right now.
I think this move was too timid on my behalf.  ===  This is a big mistake. See variation.
I thought I had to defend this side, but maybe I should've played at N7 or something instead?  ===  If you hadn't played here, you would of hurt bad as white would of invaded. See variation.
Too small, maybe I should've played around the left side?  ===  Yes, this is small
===  This is rarely a good move. Best case scenario it robs you of yose moves. Worse case is that it gives white the ability to assault your group by exploiting your shape if he ever invades the bottom (though this isn't likely in this case).
===  As a side note, your left group isn't alive yet.  I'm not sure as to how much this move gets you.
This should've been played somewhere in the center.  ===  This is needed to live, so it's not bad.
===  There is some aji for damage you can use now. See variations.
Too hasty to capture this...  ===  It's way too small, but not a bad idea, just extend first. See variation. As it stands, this an extension could easily win the game for you.
===  These are very simple moves that are worth a sizable amount apeice. White A and C are double sente, that is, sente for whoever plays them first. You must take these, as they are worth 2-3 points apeice.
===  This is really small. See variation. This is probably what lost you the game in yose.
===  White gets this in sente, worth a few points.
===  This is worth a few points in sente.
A and B are moves that are gote for you, but stop sente moves from white. They're worth about 2-3 point apeice, and letting white get them both can hurt. Also, there are other big points.
===  This is small, and gote. See variations.
===  3 point sente move by white
===  3 point sente move by white.
===  3 point sente move by white.
===  This move is worth very little.
Should've captured this stone...
===  1 point gote - save this for later. A and B are themselves 2 point gotes.
Should be at D6.
useless move that turned into a ko :)
===  If you lose the ko, white gets one point from the L19 stone. Same as if you avioded it in worse case, so not a bad move.
Score estimation:  White territory: 75 White captures: 11  Black territory: 76 Black captures: 12  White score: 92,5 Black score: 88,0  White wins by 4,5
Starting to get desperate for ko-threats...
Now I got the ko, but still lost by 2,5 points.
CG: It is hard to comment on the white side in a handicap game - of course white will try to play overplays. I will nevertheless try to point out moves I consider mistakes and answer your questions.
I also considered "A"  CG: I would also play this move. The lower right is not so urgent - you do not know which approach move there is better (R6 or O3)- or do you?
I don't know joseki here. Is this too high. Also, how do I punish black's large knight's move, or can I?  CG: Well, there is no Joseki because C5 was a bad move since there is no black stone around D10. Black's large knight move is not necessarily good: In addition to C3 it leaves aji at E3 (when white gets a stone at J3). Locally, this is a good result for white, D10 is ok.
Also considered "A"  CG: ... which would have been the normal move. B14 looks dubious.
I played this quickly, think it connected white and cut black. I realised almost right away, that black is still connected. Evidence that B14 was poor?  CG: Yes. I considered C14 instead of C15, but it seems not to be good either.
CG: I would prefer the double hane E11.
CG: ?? If you knew black could link up, why didn't you separate him first? I think one group should at least become ko. I think this is the first serious mistake by white.
CG: This is gote, isn't it? I would prefer to play tenuki and approach the bottom right corner with R6.
CG: Of course black should play elsewhere - I would play Q10.
CG: ?
This looks small. I think I want to use my wall to attack something, but where?  CG: Well, this just destroys the corner aji at C3 and in fact just helps black.  The black group in the top left is just about 10 points - so why are you in a rush to "attack something"? There is nothing yet to attack, so you should just play normal moves (like e.g. R6, R14 or R10).
Playing on the undeveloped side better?  CG: Common sense would be that the right side is more important - you cannot build up much territory in front of the rock-solid corner in the lower left.
CG: Just R6 would be better.
CG: An overplay I would not dare to play.
CG: This is of course a mistake - black should just extend to Q15. Your wall would be neutralized by the two-point extension.
I'm thinking this will help me fight K17 and N17 by stealing their base. Is there a more sensible move?  CG: If black answers at N15 or O15, this is a bad exchange for you. H17 itself is small, so I'd say you have no other choice but move with P16. I can't say which is the best move - O15, P14 or Q15?
CG: Pushing from behind is bad - black should play around O15.
CG: This cut is unreasonable.
CG: Aji-keshi.
CG: This cut is not good if black answers correctly.
CG: Aji-keshi.
CG Aji-keshi.
I feel pretty good about this result.  CG: Yes, black played this very badly.
How to attack/kill this little black group?  CG: Hard to say. From the territory point of view L11 is bigger, but it would be easier for black to settle his group. I think N8 is ok.
CG: Aji-keshi and bad shape. Just L11 or M9 would be better.
CG: Good!
CG: ??
Big spoon here. Didn't see the danger.  CG: The attack failed, but N11 is not as bad as it looks since it helps P16.
Boxing the corner in so I can attack. Is there a better way?  CG: This move is ok - it strengthens your group and forces black to add another move in the corner.
CG: ?
Don't know what I expected here.  CG: I'm not sure if this is better than R3.
CG: ?
CG: Are the two stones important right now? I would say Q6 is more urgent.
CG: Should be at Q6.
CG: Overplay, should be at S6 or maybe S3.
CG: ?? Why don't you capture the corner? That would have been an easy win.
CG: Ouch - bad shape.
CG: Another mistake. Black misses one easy way to live ...
CG: ... and another.
CG: Black is dead.
CG: Unnecessarily modest and even dangerous. L14 is both bigger and more safe!
Not much of interest past here. Thank you for the review.
klin: With W has a stone at C9, G3 should be at E2.
klin: W F8 is a very thin move, meaningless.
klin: W S3 should be at N4.
klin: B Q10 at R9 better.
klin: B Q9 at R10 better.
klin: R11 should at R8.
klin: After B Q11, B is in a very bad shape.
Kirby [1k]: sorry Boss [1d]: n p  klin: P12 is better than O12
klin: W should play N17 first.  If the next few steps are the same, the Q17 R16 exchanges are bad for white.
klin: W N16 gives up the corner, too big.  Definitely should O18.
klin: W looks very bad here.
klin: B D8 E9 cut are dangerous moves.  B should play at D14 to secure the territory.
klin: B C11 too agressive.  Sill should D14.
klin: B B10 not needed.
klin: Now, is B corner alive?  W B5 can kill.  B A7 was a sente before.  B B10 eliminate that sente.
klin: B G8 very bad shape.
klin: W should give up the 3 stones here. klin: W's moves here are so bad I have no comment beyond this point.
Tame [2d]: ops
peterchris [3k]: hi hf Team [3k]: hello from Germany
peterchris [3k]: ich bin in costa rica
I think I played ok up to this point, but what now?  MR: I agree. White managed to establish some normal looking and well settled groups and did not allow himself to be caught in a fight for strange moves.  My idea would be to attack the black group on the top. The white group on the top (L17 ff) is settled, the white group in the top left corner would appreciate another move at C15, that can hopefully be added during attack.
MR: Looks reasonable.
MR: I would prefer attacking the top group and thereby stabilizing the corner with F18 or B F18, W E18.
Here I'm very angry that he got to play A16 in sente.  Was it wrong for me to play C15?  Where can I invade him to serve justice here?  MR: What exactly do you want to tell me with all your variations? I think that the main problem is that you answered with B15.  And once you answered at B15, it would be consequent just to answer A14 at B17 or B16.
MR: Strange move. Does not secure the corner plus does not really attack the top black group.
MR: Big, but I think that black should do something for his stones at the top.
MR: Although chasing the black top group and taking territory in the lower corners are other options, it does not seem unreasonable to invade here. However, I am not really an expert on this kind of invasions (we would need to refer the comment to somebody else if you want more detailed information on how to correctly proceed with the invasion).
I blew this invasion.  Not only did I get the life & death wrong, but I probably shouldn't've made the invasion in the first place. But what's better for move 32?  E3?
MR: The variations that you give starting from this move are partially rather strange.
Team [3k]: ganz schön eng
MR: ? What is the meaning? Looks to me like eye spending tesuji.
MR: What is this move for? The exchange W F17 for B F19 is bad for white.
MR: It should not happen that your attack of opponent weak group ends in gote, so that your opponent can play such large moves!
* J3  rule of thumb: skip 3 paces from a 2-stone wall, etc  this moves leaves a hole inderneath, white can probe at, say, K3 and neutralise the lower side
*K5 more solid
*thoughtless
Here I didn't want to be shut in, so I tried to jump out.  *O5 would press b down as well as jumping out
*overplay.  C8 better
*H7 better
Here I decided to set up a place to run to before playing the atari.  * the atari?  we are still in fuseki and you are thinking about endgame moves
*good
*good
*bad look at the size of the white left !  black has to invade at around E10 or somewhere before the left side becomes solid wite territory
*good
*bad  if w joins, and black joins, black will have 3 floating stones in the middle.  by threatening these, white will be able to soldify the large left side
*good to skip lightly way but a jump into C9 would be more effective
Wanted to make a moyo on top, so I pincered.
*this looks greedy.  as white i would turn at O16 and hope to build some strength from which to jump into to either the top or the right  if making a moyo on the top is your plan, O15 instead of P16 would be consistent
all the last few moves were small-scale thinking
I think R4 would have been better. I wanted to make a base while threatening to connect; but just corner would be alive anyway.  * your move is ok but small.  ABC are alternatives
Mistake. Should have been R11.  * or A
* very slow, b can ignore
Building moyo  * not really, it is wide open at A
* too slow.  A better
I didn't see this cut at all.  * it looks like an overplay.  i would consider playing A etc, sacrificing 2 stones, and making the centre moyo very solid
* overplay again. white has a double attack on the cut stones, but both should survive  i would respond with A or B
*empty triangles are almost always bad.  if you cant read it out, play safe with a solid move like A
*this lokks ok, but it causes b problems.  A or B work better
*nice forcing move
*another  fighting move. but i think b can reply at A - see variation
*A seems obvious, but does it work?
*after this move, w has more liberties than b
* i cant see any way for b to evade capture from here
*blunder
I didn't see this was atari.
How far apart is the score right now?  I felt like I had to make some huge overplays to try to catch up; since my mid-left moyo is basically destroyed and my right mid moyo is full of holes.  *rough count: white top left 21 top right 13 bottom left 16 centre right 33 prisoners 7 total 90  black left 6 bottom, assuming b A 31 upper centre 36 total 73  difference 17  not too big, but the weakness at B makes it impossible to recover.   time to resign.
* A essential
* A was the move for white
* leaves flaws at A, B etc
*very nice tesuji.  b must reply at A
* now b must play A to rescue his link to his three stones on the left to avoid making the whole left side white territory
*dont make empty triangles!
*silly.  w just plays A and they all die
* no futher comments
Serenities [9k]: Thanks kett [9k]: Thanks
W defending corner and allow to enclose themself.  kex: Why did white choose to let black enclose?  * Often it is better to not to be enclosed.    * Also, playing at A would split black in two groups, and it would make possible to attack to one of them.  Is there some specific reason for this choice?
Seem it's B mistake - better to play pincher at A-C.  kex:  Why?  My guess would be because of the marked corner stone, trying to build a framework on the upper side.  In a review, it would be good to give the reasoning, so that the weaker player learns.  (In some other situation, pincer could be worse than extending on the side)
And for W M16 also looks better  kex:  How would black punish this then?
Taking corner with wR18 is good, but shape has a wakness at Q18 - now, I think, it isn't such important, but will be in future.  kex:  True - and white got a pretty stable position on the upper side - which you can explain to be the reason why originally a pincer would have been better.
bJ17 too far, better D14 at first  kex: again - if J17 is an overplay, you can show it by an example sequence.  The benefit of J17 is that it prepares for an invasion somewhere around A while extending from the corner.  See also variations.  (I am not so strong either, so take them with a grain of salt, but I hope you get an idea of how you can try to give some food for thought in a review)
Seem good variation, as B bottom now isn't such stable and B is cut.  kex: This is a good review comment.
A bit risky move, see variantion  kex: again - a good comment - justification in the variation.
Seems normal, see variation  kex: To me this looks not so normal.  The way I think is more normal is in the second variation.
kex: this kind of a fight looks bad for white.  Neither of the white groups is very strong.
good move
O14 looks more important
odd move, better O14
P13 better
O12
W dead, better to enclose from the outside, for ex. M8 or N12-M11
kex:  I wonder if your comment was about this move.  Yes, this is not a very necessary one, the two stones were already connected.
O7 better
also doesn't needed
Big move for B
No, P2 or N1
Seems not needed just now, see variation
So, I could make conclusion that if W wouldn't try to save R11 group then W'd win that game.
I thought, it was better to take another corner but to save on of the two existing   W: That is true, there is no reason not to take the empty corner :)
W: What he played [A] was a definite overplay. [B] is the usual joseki move.
W: This move may look aggressive, but it is simplay a mistake. The first move I consider, given the shape, is D15, cutting off his stone. Afterwards, you can connect at D16 or by capturing the C15 stone in a ladder
This is not a terrible move, but it gives White some better continuations.
Good, solid play for Black  [A] does not kill White, and the cutting point might be very painful later.  [B] does not kill White either, bit there is less future weakness, and White will not get anything out of crawling along the second line so early in the game.
Went on, building a Wall agains the marked stone.  W:  Good :)
W: now is the time to play a big point. K16 immediately jumps to mind, as an ideal extension from Q16, and an efficient way to extend from your wall.  Generally a five space extension is considered ideal. You may wonder why such a large extension is good, so I will attempt to explain. You can see the explanation at [A]
W: Very, very small, and a waste of a move.
W: This is bad fo White, because it is two weak stones next to a small wall, and Black's next move is quite good., although a farther pincer attack would give lem less of a chance to settle their shape. I still recommend K16, because it is the ideal 5 space extension.
Making territory and also attacking his stones, thought it couldn't be that bad.  W: That is true, but it would have been even better before he played G16.
W: attacking from a distance is good. It is always useful to remember though that the knight's jump can be cut.
And again, building a wall and attacking  W: Still good :)
W: this is the start of a pushing fight, a very common scenario in go. The player who is ahead has a huge advantage, because he can hane at any time. When you are ahead, you can extend a single place or hane, and when you are behind, you should try to jump away as soon as possible. Here you should still hane or double hane, running them into your wall. also this builds a thick wall facing the right edge.  Notice, it is when you get into this close fighting that White tends to get the advantage. It is very hard to kill something, and if you do not do it right or cannot, you tend to make yourself very thin in the area.
Too afraid so I thought "maybe you should make the corner yours"  W: You should not let them get ahead in the pushing race, as now you cannot attack them, and your strong wall will be cut off from everything, and be forced to live after White escapes.
I absolutely don't know, what to play against P17. The following moves doesn't look bad for my I think.  W: an easy way to respond is by filling in your only weakness, the P16 push, that way White is trapped with tny territory along the upper edge. See the earlier variation.
W: White is now alive in the corner for sure. The combination of moves like S19 and T18, making an eye there, is a very common, useful technique for living easily.
W: Probably a too small move, considering, the white stones won't die.
W: When White cuts here, you are in a tight spot.
now White has a weak group to attack, and it is no longer possible to get a very good area along the right, wasting the efficiency of the wall on H and J lines. Black has a shape weakness at S15 that White can take advantage of. B is also a very good place to continue and attack.
W: this is bad of White, allowing Black to counter attack against the three weak stones/
good attack :)
now you have to be careful, you have two groups under attack. If you push him directly, you throw him into your second weak group. The trick is to attack from a distance.
This forces White to attack you
if you do not follow up, White makes good shape.
W: good job noticing the snapback here. It is seeing these simple capture techniques that make forcing your opponent around in a fight much easier.
now White is in serious trouble, and is pushing from behind, again, being ahead in a fight like this is quite good :)
W: [A] is making two eyes in gote, While [B] continues an attack on two weak groups.
slow, now WHite can play P10, forcing you inside a huge wall.
I live <3  You had a good chance of living before, and making an eye just wastes a move. Look at the variation beginning on move 71.
Too far maybe? For which Side should I have aimed? Or should I have attacked the marked Stone? If attacking, from which Side?    (No need to give a big introducing in Fu/Joseki, just a little hint, from which Side and how and why, would be enough for me at this time) +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ W: This is a good point to stop and look at how the game progressed. First, there is still that very very imporant pushing fight against the G13 group. It seems like that is the biggest, most urgent area right now. allowing it to escape weakens Black's position. ([A] see variations for move 34)  Approaching the marked stone is now very difficult, due to the White wall on rows 9 and 10. he will force you into a cramped shape and attack you, maybe even killing you.  The move you played is too close to your thickness to be very efficient, and [A] more effecticely builds you influence.  Also notice though that building influence and a big wall does not do you nearly as much good now as it did earlier in the game.
Again, use thickness to attack towards. pincering from a huge group just wastes its attacking ability. Running a small group into a big group squashes the small group.  [A] is a tiny extension. [B] forces the stones into Black's thicker side.
[A] is a nice placement tesuji, but it does build White's thickness, making E4 and E5 weak. You should wait, and if White wastes a move to prevent [A], you will have gained a move.
Black is in trouble.
White is helping you by playing so close, thank him by making good shape when you can :)  The triangled point makes a tiger's mouth, pushing him around and getting easy eyeshape.
W: remember when I said being behind in a push race is bad?  hane and attack him very harshly.
Not really gaining territory, but agains building out, outer influence.   W: This takes the pressure off of the weak J3 and K3 stones.
hane to attack, he is so weak there, he will not be able to cut and get a good result.
The marked place was problably a very bad Idea. I Think better would have been(see variation)   W: Once you have beun to cut him , it is essential that you follow-up, otherwise, why not just skip playing O11 for now and play directly at G5, looking to cut later? Also consider the O9 cut.
W: Now he is even stronger in the area than before.
taking those two ist probably less worth than 122    You should have dealt with ths group a long long time ago. Now there is nothing you can do, and the entire sequence you played in the beginning, getting that huge marked wall, is very much spoiled.
bad shape, see how dynamically things change if you lose initiative in a pushing fight?
Maybe the last to moves I was too afraid? He get's a good wall :  Yes, you missed your chances to make him suffer, and he has turned the tables.
He gets points, so do I  Let is look at the territory breakdown now, I will have it on the next thread down :)
Capturing at F6 is huge, because White running away there will be a huge, painful reduction
Not good I think. I made him close his territory just by defending a bit. I don't gain much, but lose the opportunity to attack there.  Maybe moves like H17 would be better?  H17 is certainly a big endgame move, but taking at F6 is still quite big, more than the 4 points it seems. Your attack at F2 is also quite good.
this is very very good :)
W: White here looks to be in great danger!
W: This is a real-game life and death problem.  Reading this out is very important, because if you mess it up, you have wasted many opportunities.
Thought it could die...failed :/  W: Look at the variations for move 146 :)
W: [A] is a free forcing move.
wasted move
Now, in the review, a very senseless ko. Afer A2 he lives :|  You could have killed his group though. see the variation for move 172.
I should have connected at E9
monkey jump...
afraid of...probably nothing...   yes, this is just losing a point
Well....what are the biggest endgame moves now?   W) most of the endgame is over, and it is only tiny things left, go to the next thread to see the endgame move :)
too afraid again I guess   W: yup
Better to connect direct at A. After this move black will force you to connect and then the marked stone is overconcentrated.
This is a good result for black.
These four black moves are not so good. They aren't strong and give white fourth line territory. White should cut them off with a move like A.
Too defensive.
Although it is big, it's too early to play such a move.
Not necessary. A is still very important. Black should play a move like B. If he does, it will not be easy for white to separate black.
It may be better to secure the corner with A.
You can just take the stone with A. But I think you should cut black. See variation.
A would be more offensive.
This is asking for a cut. It would be better to play A or B. C is also a possibility.
The marked stone is not important. It's not so bad for you if black captures it.
You can probably live with A, although it would be small. See variation.
This is bad shape. You don't even have one eye. A is still big.
The exchange of the marked stones is in black's favor. The game is now very difficult for white.
Good.
You should try to cut black. With A for example.
Black should have played here. Good move.
Succes for white.
See variation to stay connected.
Black should have captured at A.
Useless, but you can always try.
Good move.
You should defend your marked group, or black can kill it at A.
FM: after this kind of move, white must watch his steps carefully to be the first to protect the open skirt at A.
FM: this kind of things feel like an aji keshi, as black is forced to protect his weakness on the bottom
FM: in this case, I think that the marked exchange was good for black
FM: natural
FM: chinese style, probably ok here
FM: slow move. This is not the classical chinese opening - the left black group has still some defects so white don't have to play only defense here
FM: nice move
FM: Submissive move, making a bad shape and minimal attack on black. If you wanted to play this shape, it was better without the marked exchange.
FM: the last big point on the board, but I think black is a bit ahead now.
FM: It's very hard to say if this move is good or not. Black profit from this move is not so great and by playing here, black forces white to take the huge point of L18. Black should probably play elsewhere and then decide to play this or A.
FM: the marked exchange was an excellent kikashi for black, letting him to have the control over the game by having sente. Although this move is locally quite strong, I still prefer playing at A - this move is just what black wanted.
"classical" shape... (LL)  FM: very sharp move, requires a lot of reading before being played. Although there might be some tricks, your variations show black can be killed quite easily, also because of the triangled stone. Playing D and letting the possibility of E was good enough.
the most severe continuation ??? (LL)  FM: this move is the usual territorial one and is rarely bad.
white looses sente... moreover, it seems that this move is not necessary !? (LL)  FM: true, black cannot capture the white stones. Still there was some bad aji in the corner and this move is pretty big, though A is more important now.
FM: unnecessary move, aji keshi
now, black dominates the center... (LL)  FM: good move, this will be hard for white
FM: good
FM: this jump looks natural, but when playing a move like this it is important to have prepared some plan to deal with things like A. If there is no plan, it is usualy better to play solid and just once push at B
trying to save points, but also taking somes risks... (LL)  FM: this is kind of position you can play very efficiently on dragon go server as you have much much time. The position is quite complicated now and in the tournament game I would probably play the safe way of A as the points difference if white lives like this or with A first is not very big.
good move : white is in trouble... (LL)  FM: the key to avoid complications in this situation is the G move
trying to find a dynamic continuation... (LL)  FM: the way of thinking was correct
that's seems an obvious move, but it it a problem for white ! (LL)
living definitely, and waiting for better moments... (LL)
good move. (LL)
FM: this response looks nice
bon coup encore : blanc ne peut plus se connecter... (LL)  FM: natural resistance
mistake !? (LL)  FM: no, good move
FM: very painful, white could connect
FM: A, aiming at B, was much bigger
the game is now clearly good for black !... (LL)  FM: yes, black stands better
A was too big now
FM: only gote
FM: very nice tesuji, I don't know if I would be able to find it in a game. Unfortunately not big enough to win this game.  This game was quite nice, without any really big mistakes, which made it also quite hard to comment. I marked some moves you can improve in your future games quite easily - the square marked ones - in the lower left the common shape is on C5, on the left side always think about all the moves and in the upper right the empty triangle is almost never good. The triangled moves are the ones which cost you the game I think. After the two slow N15 and P8 moves, black developed more quickly and got the upper hand. After that the Q4 and M17 moves were the opportunities, though they might be a bit difficult to find.  I hope you enjoyed my thoughts and wish you many nice games  Martin    ~~~(_,_,_*>
white resigns... (LL)
[GB] interesting ... I coulnd't find it in Kogo's Joseki dictionary and it doesn't look good. Luckily W chose to do the wrong thing 8-).
[Kim] ~   Is this extension correct?  [GB] I think it is. White's R16 wasn't so great, in fact it's only used when there is white lower on the right hand side.
[GB] very bad -- there is almost never a reason to make an empty triangle, exept in the endgame, of course.
[GB] good
[GB] I would probably tenuki. This area is not going to belong to anyone, both players are present.  There is lot's of empty room left on the board.
[Kim] ~  Maybe  Q 10 better?  [GB] yes, but tenuki is even better.
[GB] R3 is more solid
[Kim] ~   Too loose?  [GB] This is fine and it creates a nice moyo.
[Kim] ~ I felt happy with the opening, Should i have been more ahead since i was black?  [GB] Actually, I'm not quite sure that you are ahead. White's last move is quite big.
[Kim] ~ This was to add some complication to his west wall for when i pushed into the centre. is it a mistake  for white to answer this? I think i got lucky that he didn't take D15  [GB] I think the right spot to attack the left hand side is at C12. See variation.
[GB] since it is likely that you are not going to catch those five stones, attacking them from the right might be a better idea, since that way you can make yourself some territory.
[Kim] ~  This sequence was bad for me. i was trying to make white heavy while i pushed down, but instead just have them thickness. also looking for a cut.
[BG] playing around here won't help you much, since the area is wide open. Something like B6 is bigger.
[GB] good
[GB] not very important to defend.
[BG] what is the purpose of this move?
[BG] hmm. how is this not going to get cut?
[GB] this is greedy. L2 is a good move, but even that is perhaps too early.
[BG] good
[Kim] ~  Uh oh...
here i felt i would escape ok. is there a better series of events for black?
[GB] no point, there is no way to save these now.
[GB] Big 8-)
[Kim] ~  messing up my centre territory... M8 would have prevented this mess
[GB] I don't know what white is trying here.
[GB] white didn't have to move here
[GB] since your group is dead, this stone will be dead too 8-(
i tried to keep sente and take the bigger points in endgame which may have saved the match for me  [GB] the idea is correct of course. the order is not the best. A couple of moves that are bigger I think: C8, T5
[GB] what's he doing?
[GB] this is small and can be answered at A15 in which case you have to defend at some point.
[GB] worth zero points, right. you can do that anytime.
[GB] ???
[GB] C8 is still open
petitgo [5k]: thx
petitgo [5k]: you too
tealeaf [6k?]: :)
R: That's low teritorial move. In current position I highly prefer K10, which keeps balance (in meaning of overall position, playing in sense with opponent moves) From another point of view, filling a gap is generally wrong idea. Choose move to strengthen your stones (e.g. J3 or O4)
R: wrong idea, white has easy possibility to build up wall at bottom and one proverb says: Don't play too close to thickness
R: purpose of this move is to attack other side than white plays. After F16 black hasn't good continuation
--  I felt that I didn't take advantage of this too well. The invasion on the left hand side was partially to break up his side, but I ended up defending it for a lot of moves when the top side was quite open. Should I have jumped to the top side earlier?  R: actually I prefer white. Black missed importance of top side and got unsatisfactory result at left side
--  Would somewhere higher be better? I like having a safer corner, but maybe somewhere like R{9,10} would have been better?  R: see variants Both R6 and R14 are low which is insufficient
tealeaf [6k?]: What's the lizard in your picture? petitgo [5k]: newt
tealeaf [6k?]: ah
petitgo [5k]: same family as the salamander
tealeaf [6k?]: sure.
tealeaf [6k?]: any reason for the choice? tealeaf [6k?]: (of picture)
petitgo [5k]: I like these animals
tealeaf [6k?]: :D tealeaf [6k?]: best reason  --  This was an example of, I feel, petitgo letting me lean across too hard. I was expecting a cut.
petitgo [5k]: sure !!
--  Right out in the middle of nowhere! I was a bit confused as to how to deal with it. In the end, I solidified on the right and then tried to cut up between the stone at N10 and the rest of the white stones.  Possibly I should have tried harder. Or was there a better way to handle this?
R: good move
--  These are big, wide-open moves. They felt a bit weak to me, but I felt like the large chunks around the corner were available to be grabbed and so tried.
--  Should this have been B(A16), W(A17), B(A14)?
tealeaf [6k?]: ah, tu es francais? petitgo [5k]: oui
petitgo [5k]: and you ?
tealeaf [6k?]: (je ne suis pas tres fort en francais :D) tealeaf [6k?]: English
petitgo [5k]: right  --  Again, I felt like I'd got away lightly without being cut here.
petitgo [5k]: you seem to speak a good french
tealeaf [6k?]: pas vrai!
tealeaf [6k?]: seulement un petit peu petitgo [5k]: >"je ne suis pas trés fort en français"< == cette phrase est parfaite
petitgo [5k]: this sentence is perfect tealeaf [6k?]: merci :D. j'aime les langues.
petitgo [5k]: so do I  --  Too defensive? Would it have been better to come up behind somewhere around M9?
petitgo [5k]: but i 'm not so strong
tealeaf [6k?]: ah, your english is much better than my french! petitgo [5k]: thans a lot
petitgo [5k]: but your french doesn't seem to be bad
tealeaf [6k?]: i learnt it a long time ago at school. my spelling will be very bad.
petitgo [5k]: tan KK s tealeaf [6k?]: :) petitgo [5k]: yes, it's very difficult to spell a foreign langage
petitgo [5k]: I think a god way to learn it is to look at pictures, or listen radio
tealeaf [6k?]: sure.  --  This felt like a nice shape, but it seems a bit weak in retrospect. Should I have pushed up?
tealeaf [6k?]: i'm learning chinese. tealeaf [6k?]: the writing is very hard!
petitgo [5k]: I began to learn it to  --  Again, this doesn't seem to threaten much.
tealeaf [6k?]: i've studied it for two years. petitgo [5k]: when did you begin to learn it ?
petitgo [5k]: me tto
petitgo [5k]: I had a chinese professor
tealeaf [6k?]: 你会说中文吗? petitgo [5k]: but i stopped
tealeaf [6k?]: ah petitgo [5k]: i can't understand what you wrote tealeaf [6k?]: just "can you speak chinese?" tealeaf [6k?]: :D petitgo [5k]: ok
tealeaf [6k?]: (="ni hui shuo zhong wen ma?")
petitgo [5k]: i only recognise "ni" and "zhong"
petitgo [5k]: I hope i have the chance to learn it again
--  I knew that this was coming. I assumed that it would work, but never got around to defending the corner.  As a wider point, at what stage is it best to solidify a 4-4 point, and what's the best move to do it? (Depending on the surrounding board, of course.)  R: I think white wants too much. I don't see how to get at least ko here, except black's mistake ;)
tealeaf [6k?]: hmm. elegant play by me there. :D petitgo [5k]: hehe
tealeaf [6k?]: (slow at counting!) petitgo [5k]: np
ff - This is one possible approach.  However, the play at F17 is normal and good.  In this situation it is better.  See the variation...  The high approach to a 4-4 stone gives away too much on the left side.  It stakes everything on building up the upper and right sides.  The main weakness is that it has no good follow up at C17, which is normally a fundamental weakness of the 4-4 stone.    When it is played at the professional level, the high approach is normally in relation to a much more developed position on the right side.  However, the normal Chinese fuseki position in the upper right is fundamentally a low, fighting position.  Therefore the relationship with F16 can not be especially good - not sufficiently for giving White a better than average result on the left side.
ff - This is the most common continuation after the F16, D14 exchange.  However, here Black makes this worse by further solidifying White and creating some not very helpful stones that could become a target later.  I think Black would have been better to have simply extended along the top to K16.  See the variation...
ff - Black tries too hard here.  Black has to continue and finish the upper side.  See the variation...
ff - White very kindly follows Black around the board.  Although this is sufficient to give a good result in relation to both the bottom and the upper left.
ff - Since White ends in gote on the bottom, Black can repair the defect in the upper left.  However, J17 is a very tight defensive play.  It should probably be at K16 instead.  The point is how to think about this position.  Which side of the top is more important: the upper left or the upper right?  The upper left corner is played out.  A question remains of whether White will jump out or Black will jump up to the area around F14.  However, against that the upper right is wide open.  Black should want to play a stone here that influences the upper right.  J17 does not do that effectively.
ff - This is the crux of this game.  First of all we should consider whether this is a good play by White at this time?  The two-space jump looks big in relation to the wall on the far left.  However, it is thin and it is actually quite close to the stone on K4.  Black should not fear this play.  There are alternatives that White could have equally considered.  See the variations...
ff - Black immediately attacks the thinness of White's jump.  This is natural and reasonable.  It is not the only approach that Black might adopt (see the variations) but it is the one that White most has to consider in deciding to jump out.
ff - Black becomes confused over the objective here.  If Black wanted to protect the corner, the plays at O4 and O5 were unnecessary.  If Black wants to cut at N4, this play strengthens White.  See the variation...
ff - Black has not yet protected R3 and White is stronger along the bottom.
RickMott: Is extending and fighting here reasonable?  Is there a better way to deal with the emerging white moyo on the bottom?  ff - The timing of this question is wrong :-)  Black has to ask (and answer) this question before playing  N6, ideally before playing O4!
ff - White goes in the wrong direction with this play.  It does not threaten Black's corner because the White stones are too weak.  This is a great opportunity that Black misses.
ff - Unnecessary.  If Black can not ignore Q8, then cutting and fighting is unreasonable.  See the variation...
ff - White is smiling now.
ff - This is a mistake in direction.  White pushes Black out of the bottom into the center.  White should keep pushing Black to the left until the Black stones run into the wall on the left...
ff - Basically White turns away from the fight at a critical moment.  Note that if Black cuts at N3 before the Black stones escape, White just sacrifices O2 and O3 since they have no meaning in the fight.
ff - This looks dangerous since both sides get cut here.  See the variation...  On the other hand, Black is definitely stronger in this area now, so...
ff - A nice play although it is unfortunate that Black did not find the right follow up.  It looks like White is in more trouble here than Black.
RickMott: Thoughless reflex move.  Found a better one.  P8 captures the cutting stones or makes me good on the outside.  ff - It is a pity that Black did not spot the weakness in White's position.  If Black considers White's position solid then the subsequent plays in this area are not logical.  Let's see what we mean...
ff - This forces White to weaken the Black stones in the area.  Assuming that the White stones are uncuttable, Black should want to give up the two stones in the center on a small scale.  See the variation...
ff - Black forces White out into Black's largest potential area.  This would actually be an impressive way of playing on a grand scale if Black turned back now and cut White apart!  :-)
RickMott: Very complicated.  Not clear who is attacking whom.
RickMott: Dumb.  Should give up the 4 stones, play K9?  ff - By now it is rather difficult to give up the stones.  Compared to the previous variation, White will do well enough with the larger-scale capture to have a solid lead.  Really Black has to see the cut around here to make sense out of the play up to this point.
ff - Black looks dead here.
RickMott: Am I lost at this point, or do the variations make it possible to keep playing?  They sure seem better than what I actually did.  ff - Basically I think it is time for Black to move on to the next game.  Having said that, Black gets back into this game and is leading toward the end until the ko that occurs in the upper right.  There are really about three different games wrapped up in this record.  It is beyond the limits of my stamina to give it all the analysis it deserves.  My comments end here except for a couple concerning the situation surrounding the ko at the end.
RIckMott: Feels like this is too far for White, but I failed to punish it.  Was there a way?  G12, maybe?  I feel like if I can cut this off, I may have enough to compensate for the big loss at the bottom.
ff - Black goes wrong here and protects the wrong stones.  These do not matter because Black can capture the White stones above.  See the variation.
ff - This loses immediately.  Black should fight the ko...
WinPooh [3k]: thx WinPooh [3k]: bye RickMott [4k]: Thx.  Clicked on the wrong point... :) RickMott [4k]: You were ahead anyway. WinPooh [3k]: lost anyway RickMott [4k]: Yes RickMott [4k]: Spasibo. :)
Ben: This move is a bit wishy washy.  I have a feeling I know why you played it.  If white were to make an approach on r-6 he would then be overconcentrated correct?  Well in this case getting an approach on X accomplishes that and this so it should be prefered.
Ben: White has a rather unusual pattern along the top so it is difficult to judge the best move.  I marked with circles some possible alternatives with no mention as to their quality (experiment with these moves in other words and see if they work with your style).
Ben: See my discussion for move 5.  Another alternative would be to approach white's marked stone right away.
Ben: Really white ought to complete his first two stones development first.
Ben: At this point I would try to do something with my invasion stone.
Ben: It is sometimes better to wait for other developments before attempting to live with a stone like this.  In fact I am not sure it is possible in this static position with no other black influence in the area.
Ben: Really d-17 or the move on k-6 I mentioned previously are the biggest areas.
Ben: I would probably try a different joseki here since this one only leaves black concentrated.
Ben: This looks like a mouseslip, it isn't good in any case.
Ben: This is a very difficult move to judge accurately.  I found something of a tesuji for black.
Ben: White is probably going to win this group regardless of the alternatvies now.
Ben: Its difficult to suggest better.  The area is big but it allows white to attack.  Perhaps something like p-10 trying to goad w to invade first would be worth a try.
Ben: Black can live quite easily so this move I would probably dismiss as a possibility.
Ben: This move is a little submissive.  Consider how the extension works from the marked stones (since this move seems more like a territory seeking move).  White's move has had good effect.  The a variation is kind of a cosmic variation, the b variation seeks immediate life.
Ben: Black's position is a total shambles now.  I can see nothing spectacular happening for him in this sector.  The remainder of the game I feel you did as best you could (if your black!).  Black is just to far behind to put up enough of a fight.  No more comments.
Not a bad move but a bit odd and slow, around K4 i far more common but D or Q 10 is also playble. R5 or 6 are also nice.
She seems to be cautious, but then...  Ah, the sanrensai opening. Actually this is an opening that is used for fighting, not to take territory.  White is saying to invade or lose... ;-) But the truce is if W get to play all D,K,Q 10 it's gameover for black. And in my games my opponents are generally scared of the sanrensai that your C7 played at C14, F17, O17 or R14. Sometimes K16 just to prevent from getting the sanrensai... If you really wanna know how devestaing the sanrensai can be, read "Power of the Starpoint". If you learn it by hart your opponents will tremble in fear... ;-) Well almost anyway.
Would you play C7 now? Or does K10 seem more intresting.
This is a warrior´s move, isn´t it?  The ide is right but i think R7 would be better then W could extend in either way(R10 or R4).  R10 ends up with a crosscut and sh**loads of other complications if one isn't carefull. But there's a golden rule to crosscuts, extend away from your strength. It's not alway correct but most of the times.  To know more about crosscuts read "crosscut workshop". But be aware it's a somewhat confusing book.   Though the whole consept of crosscuts is to complicate things and confuse your opponent if you ask me :)
It helped me to get stronger there
W could protect at Q6 or S4. But i think O4 then Q6, and not to answer the atari at P4 would be foolish, this early in the game.
On the other hand, the Q4 goup has also became stronger  Black at S6 would takeaway most of the base W´s Q4 group. R14 aims mor for the corner then R13 but B gets weak or rather gets weakness at R12. B can live with this because of the 3-3 invasion work extra well for B to get territory but W gets an wall that makes the area (Q16-K16) wery easy make territory for W.
Aiming for a crosscut, huh? Be carefull they have a tendency to backfire.
This secuence ended up being good for me, but that was just luck!  I would play Q15. it's makes a nice wall.
Well, this ladder can be forgotten...
JuanM: Creo que no escapa
Perhaps from this point on she will change her strategy  I hate to tell you but B is play exactly as W wants. sanrensei is made to fight and invade and what is B doing.... More or less desperatly trying to prewent W form Making territory with the sanrensei.
My group of the lower left corner is very weak I think  Group? If your thinking of C7 and D4 as a group your out on thin ice... What will B do if W plays D3 or W at B5 followed by C3 or more important what will be left for B?  I would think of the two stones as "A future group" or a "group to be" but they are not yet a group.
G16 is a lot more fun for W
I was securing the center  Why? 1 in a 100 games gives me territory in the center. B3 or B6 is better. And if W plays F9 how secure is your center...
C18 is way bigger for W
90 at c3 would have been a worst problem? However, I lost a big amount of territory there afterwards  C3 not bad B. use the wall and get alot of territory. W ends up with a few points in the corner B get the edge and maybe a huge extension into the center, and just to make thing a little bit better for Black white's R4 group is really in bad danger especially if B play moves like R5 and then if possible T3.  If W wanna attack he should play something like D3, F3, G3 even H3 with a followup at M3 would work
The upper group is alive so why shouldn't B try to get territory on the 7:th line?
Q8 would be better
Uh, this made me get very scared! It should.. I don't think W has any ide how devistaing it is.
Argh, learn this NOW!!! If your about to play an empty triangle(R7 makes Q6-7 into one) THINK AGAIN AND AGAIN AND AGAIN!!!!!! Until you find a better move. Even PASS is a better move. What B should play here is Q8.  Though as always in GO there are exceptions and those are . you can make an empty triangle as a atarimove, to live with a group, to kill group. Other than that, no it cant be any other kind of exceptions.   You may laugh a little about my attitude towards empty triangels but really they are that bad. Even the L8 that W makes laterin this game is more efficient the this R7.
Lucky :) W at S7 and the whole edge is gone like *POFF*
I didn´t diserve to win that, I had´t plan this at all, It wast just a big coincidence  You didn't win you were just lucky...
He, she was proving me. Sometimes I do that, I play first on the other side of the board to distract the opponent, and then I come back, but it never works  Aint that the truth.  :D And if you havn't figured it out yet, it probably never gonna work. But if you don't try you won't know if it could work...
This is the time when I think she was too hurried to make two eyes  W at T4 = Alive  think O6 is better because even if B cuts at N4 W can still towards that group in hope of rescue and at the sametime destroy what little territory B could get there. W should NOT try to run with that group because if W fails to save it the cost is tremendous. Now it's just 4 points that needs 2-3 black moves to be killed
Another battle begins!  If W play T3 B would be in great danger, only problem is it the kind of danger that's easily missed.  The book "In the beginning" it's explained why the 2 by 2* wall is not so good. By the way if you gonna read only one book "In the beginning" is the one i recomend.  *MN3-OP4-QR3 makes the 2 by 2 wall
Also lucky
Unnessesary, B has to play L3 before B can cut and even after B has cut W can still play T4 and live.
Julieta didn´t want me to conect with the other group
um, the slowest move of the game i think. Does just about nothing...
I was sure I had saved that 4 stones group, foolish
One of those times that your stones dissappearing surprise you
Monkeyjump is alway fun but this time E3 or 4,  is funier...
When it seemed we were closing our frontiers, she made that  move  And B should just give them up and play at E3.
As i commented before on N4 and O6. The cost of failing when running (with the group instead of running to the group) to saftey is tremendous...
I could have ran away
And obviously the other group died with it
Non sense  Only thing to use there is as ko-treathts
G1 is almost as unnessesary as L8.
I also thought I had losr the group of D9, but I managed to conect it
She could have used that opening to invade me
I didnt pay attention to that, and...
Playing dame when it's still points out there...  Thumbrule. 1 can i take points from my opponent. 2 can i make points 3 where do i have to protect?  in game. 1 = J1 or T6 2 = J1 or  M8 3 = T16, H10 or K1  sins J1 came up twice that what i would play the i aim for T6 and last fill the ko at H10  possible finish  B j1 W h1 B k1 W t6 B t9 or Q9 W h10 B (stop,count if ko fight is needed otherwise fill) G11 W h9 B m8
hehe, this should never happen.
I have the idea that "fat" groups like the one of D6 aren´t good, is that generaly right?  Your idea is about as correct as it can be. D6 is a telltell sign of ineffective moves and you wanna have effective moves right. The most common result for a fat group in my games is that it's dead before it can be saved and when it's saved it has usually costed both sente and 1 or even 2 big endgame moves...
Dtyler : Wrong pincer
Dtyler : Overplay
Dtyler : A and B are vital point.
Dtyler : It is better to take ko.
Dtyler : Wrong decision. See variation.
Dtyler : Try to cut is better.
Dtyler : Good result for W.
Dtyler : Now the situation is favor for W.               I finished my review here.
Dear Reviewer, I'm Bernd Sambale, normally playing with HonFu (2k) on KGS.  Here I decided for an influence game although I'm not strong at it. Please give me advice how I should have used my walls, what different lines of strategy would have been suitable.  Thank you!
I was checking and this isn't even joseki as far as I've seen, though it's talked about in whole board thinking of joseki by Yilun Yang though I don't have the book. :P
This is probably a move of instinct. I would probably play it but the more I look at the continuations, the more it looks bad.  For this move though since I don't know the kosumi here by B that much please don't think I'm totally correct. :P
This was a bad move b isn't really under attack you should of played a more solid move.
First mistake I think overextended I know that a 3 space is right so I got punsished for my mistake
now over concentrated
This is very slow and in wrong direction. You should stablise other direction.
I didnt really know how to handle this move any suggestions?  You should of played on that side first :P
This is a good move or maybe G15.
After I looked over the game I think double kakari would have been better correct?  Theres nothing for you on the top
Lots of continuations.
Slow move.
You should of just jumped out or played Q15 first instead of playing S17.
Playing at bottom is much better.
This is a bad move there is no need to peep.
This is good that you came back out but then you change plan and try to live small with B9.
More important moves.  Play at bottom is big. In the end B's biggest territory came from bottom left and it looked pretty nice.
You might want to play under to get some territory and take some away from B.
again over concentrated  If your going to move up with j4 i don't know why you went back down. Hane under  would of probably been better.
Weird shape, it might feel uncomfortable.
Nice read
P
Not needed.
Mistakes happen sometimes. xD
Thanks for taking the time to review this game for me lmk if there is anything I should really work on.
Is A or B better ??  emp: w's 10 was not good if w didn't mean to continue with G4 and so on, because now, B's G4 will be of huge strategical value.
Now I did not know what to, move at E17 was a bit slack and gave black the change to reinforce himself. Now also it lloks like a is not perfectly situated. with B black is almost alive.  Is at C cutting better ?  emp: E17 is fine, since it's w's backyard, no haste to kill a few stones, it's good to let ur target get bigger before u mount attack.
Again a slack move better at A ?  emp:w 20 was bad, remember, u are not supposed to get to 2nd line so early in the game, unless there is emergency...
emp: B21 made w's previous moves quite pointless. if i were b, i'd go G16 first, just to make w feel worse...becos w can't kill C14 with one bullet.
emp: w 22 is too predictable, not a good move
Again gives black a change to reinforce, expecially since a white has no good attack on the black group.  emp: w 32 in wrong direction.
Better at A , also because black's answer (B) strenghtens black's group on the left perfectly.  empiror: lower right is empty, much bigger than 34 or A or B
emp: what is w fighting for? to be attacked? :)
seen the outcome of this fight A and B were not the best choice. Are there other better options ?
White lives but black is much better off.  emp: w fought at a wrong place.
Better at A ? With the moves that follow black gets a lot of territory and white gets hardly anything in return.  emp: this move was innocent, it's w's following moves that's guilty.
emp: 56,58 bad, 59 should be M4
I misread this. Move was better not played.
Better at A or B ?? Again white pushes black to make territory.  emp: the thing is w's group has got no eyes, not in the position to attack
emp: b should P9, w is broken into pieces.
emp:81 unnecessary
Since I do not have a real change to kill black better to grap territory by A ??  Although I counted for black roughly 70 points. and white needs to make 40 points in the centre and with A this will be 25 points max.  emp: points at centre are harder to make, never count on that untill you are really strong.
Since I thought to grap some points in the centre while attacking black.
Better at A ?  emp: 104?
keruj [1k]: connection problem sorry
quatarbol [1d]: no problem
White can be cut know, or has to strugle to live.
Black calculated this much better.
Better first to play sequence ??
Again first A. See alternatives
Mistake should be at A.
Again white gives away points.
Mistake should be at A
quatarbol [1k]: thx keruj [1k]: thx cu  emp: b is stronger. w needs to improve on understanding of the balance, the grand direction of a situation, the value of murky moyo, and strength for close combat.
up to this point is ok. But i think that white can follow this joseki.
I think I am doing ok at this point but how about next move should I go R15 or K16   Both is playable and depends of user preference.
the marked stones are weak. the best course of action is to attack them. in the course of attacking, you can threaten the left stones.
Is G15 too slow? Or I should go R11 or R6  yes its too slow.
Now I think can only get into corner and reduce the middle later. Any suggestion?   Of course this is also playable.
How about next move?
Your move is fine.
Mistake
Fatal mistake.
Final Mistake.  After this you have no chance of winning, although your Yose is quite strong.
togibenji: same to u
Not very good. You better answer at o4  see variation
Black only can capture the marked stone
Too passive. This stone is too close to your wall.  I suggest to play O17
Black took a very nice point
You better block first. See variation
Better to block directly
I think it's better for you to connect the ko.  Black's last move is not a ko threat
This is the losing move. If you conected at L9, your chance on winning the game would be bigger.
I prefer B4 than this move.
A very slow move. I prefer to play Q9. It's sente
togibenji: i lost  by a landslide *kingaa*: hmm
No need to connect here. No way white can kill this group
I prefer have this move as a ko threat
Chemist [5k]: hi
Cuauhtle: Even it is the 5th move , some alwaysa say black should attack since there is komi, though I like this shape of first 3 stones. But is it really suitable for a good following for black?  * Don't listen to them naysayers ;) There's nothing wrong with this move, in fact, after checking in a pro fuseki database I found at least seven 9p vs. 9p games that began exactly like this.  * Of course White's next move is unusual, but that's another story. The "standard" approach would be for White to respond on the lower side, but not as close as he did. So much for the theory part.
* See variation  * Now White makes a move which seems to be testing you, an obvious way to respond would be to make a pincer attack on the lower side, but I guess that's a matter of what kind of a plan for the game you have.
* See variation. This move is from the wrong side, there's less to be gained on the left side since there's already a low stone at C5. You should approach from F17 or R6, with R6 you have to take into account the F4 stone.
* I would respond at the top instead, there's no worry about Black bulding a moyo on the left side because of the C5 stone. Besides, White F4 is already reducing the would-be moyo anyway.  * See variation
Cuauhtle: Should black play somewhere around G16 or smth , because in some josekis W play G15 to defend centre side.  * If you're afraid of White G15 then G17 is the move, another possibility is F16. I wouldn't invade as you did just yet.
Cuauhtle: overplay?  * Unnecessary aggression, but it turned out well for Black. I would play on the lower or right side instead.  * There's so much unclaimed land at the moment that an invasion clearly indicates that you have an aggressive attitude :)
* This move is bad, it accomplishes nothing while trying to take territory from the wall's side, White needs to play from the other direction here, D9 would be the move.
* This turned out well for Black, White is terribly overconcentrated with his ponnuki formation almost touching the wall, his stones are placed inefficiently. Black has gained a nice corner.  * See that White has all of her stones (except Q4 and F4 stones) concentrated in one place of the board, moreover they are terribly overconcentrated, this is already a lost game for White, I believe
* Seems like White is asking for trouble this way.
* Good, severe attack.
* This is another mistake, White is handing his stones over to Black.
* I'd just play H3 instead, it's a strong shape.
* See variation instead.
Cuauhtle: Should black start the ko or just play anywhere else bigger? (since it can be considered to be the early mid-game B has not so much serious threats, does he?.)  * White has one local ko threat and four big ones at the top, starting with E17. Black doesn't have any definite ko threats, so just let the ko be for the time being.
* If so, I'd finish the ko now (around 30 points) and White won't be able to prevent an invasion with his next move.  * You have still your Q16 stone's potential to use and White will be uncomfortable because his K4 group is so likely to come under attack in case any fight ensues.  * Still, the ko is not a burden for Black so your course may just be right as well.
* That's severe, White is really in trouble now.
* Now the game became an attack-feast for Black - so many targets!
* That's maybe too mild, what about attaching at Q3 (variation).
* I wouldn't touch like this, touching usually makes opponent stronger, I'd play Q6 instead and let him struggle in the corner, this way White gets a big corner.
* That's a 3 point sente move - very small and you lose a valuable ko threat. Why play it now?
* Now you only have one ko threat left in the corner.
* White got a big corner, but his situation is otherwise bad.
* Nice combination.
Cuauhtle: Here, should bkack worry about making life on right side? or can he play just some other place like R14 or O16?  * Worry is too big a word but Black should definitely keep an eye on his group while attacking White. O16 would be the worse choice, I'd play around Q12/R12, maybe a line higher, or around N8. White N8 would be painful now because it makes a nice shape for White and helps the Q10 stone a lot.
* Why on this side and not take White's base away with R13? White now has the ideal extension to R14. After making yourself strong you have to attack, you gave White a big corner at Q4, remember?
* White is chaotic, R14 seems to be the top priority.
* This is so small. White needs to do something with one of his 3 weak groups, you can't defend your territory with moves like this when the outcome of the whole game depends on your ability to stabilize multiple weak groups elsewhere. White simply doesn't have time for D14.
* Try J14 instead.
Cuauhtle: can white tenuki here and play Q14? IIn some sources i have read that it is super-urgent?  * White's situation is pretty terrible overall, I don't see a way. Q14 is sure big.
* Wrong direction. You're strong at  the top right, so I'd push in that direction, looking forward to attacking K8 and G10 stones. Here, you're basically making territory from your strong stones, overconcentrated.
* See, now White is getting connected...
* I'd prefer K10 instead.
* Very good. This is basically the moment for White to think about resigning (if it wasn't some time ago already, that is)
* Nice finish. I won't comment on yose as you have an overwhelming advantage right now and there's really no point.  * White lost this game due to big mistakes in the direction of play in the fuseki and middle game and overall chaotic play.  * In the future please rememner that it is customary to ask for reviews about games that you lost, not won (even less by a huge margin like this one), you really learn more that way.  * Commentary ends here. Merry Christmas!
Cuauhtle: Biggest move?
I think there is no need to play C7.  A stone placed in 4-4 dont need a reinforce so early in the game. I think it'd better to play D10 or approach a white stone either in Q14 or O3
In this case Q17 need reinforce. A move like Q15 or R15 would assure you the corner. H17 is too far from D16 to act like an approach to D16 better F17
The same comment to H17 would apply here
I think L4 is better. If your opponent cut at L4 you will have an hard fight.
This move only helps black, and achieve nothing. The fight is lost better play elsewere.
dewill5 [19k]: seperated groups are bad
Both played for small points.... There are bigger and more valuable points on the goban. If your your group have no weakness, you should look for big points.
Too small. Theare are bigger point on the goban. Q10 or C14. Also enclosing the upper-right corner is good
dewill5 [19k]: too offenseive for my taste
mit185 [18k]: sorry!!
dewill5 [19k]: so offensive player , dewill5 [19k]: ><
dewill5 [19k]: your losing by alot now
mit185 [18k]: are you still there?? dewill5 [19k]: yes dewill5 [19k]: im just thinking
mit185 [18k]: okies
I think that it's very hard to save Q17. Maybe better leave alone Q17 and try to put in use H17 or try to save the L7 group
The wrong side. T11 do the job
dewill5 [19k]: hehe doubble trouble technquie ive made
Too late! I end my review here. The battles that came i think are good to learn and pratice, but quite confusing to comment on. I think both of you have to pratice with tsumego, and try to read at least 3 move head before made a move (i know it's an hard exercices but ii will pay for the effort!). I hope you find the review usefull, don't esitate to contact me if you find a comment too obsure.
dewill5 [19k]: i did a misclick
dewill5 [19k]: you are a good player
dewill5 [19k]: undo my dumb brother bumped me dewill5 [19k]: cmon dewill5 [19k]: so inconsiderate mit185 [18k]: i've already given u 1
dewill5 [19k]: so
dewill5 [19k]: this was a accident >> mit185 [18k]: so it's petty 2 blame ur brother dewill5 [19k]: its unfair
alcatraz: to much pressure with the timer dewill5 [19k]: (unfair player)
dewill5 [18k]: we are done mit185 [18k]: almost dewill5 [18k]: how? alcatraz: can i play  either of you after?
dewill5 [18k]: cmon tell me dewill5 [18k]: now?
dewill5 [18k]: now?
Black 6 seems dubious to me.  <Svante> Yes, Black is lacking a base. However, don't expect too much from this, since Black does have the very active hoshi stones around the board.
I decided to wariuchi so b  would either be baseless or play the not so attractive extension at j17.  <Svante> This is a very good point.
Black 12 seems to make good shape for him, but also for w, not sure its a good move.  <Svante> After the exchange of F13 for D12, Black has become strong enough to either tenuki or attack White. This, as you already remarked, is a defensive move, strengthening both sides, so it helps White more than Black here.
i didnt know how to play locally, maybe m15?  <Svante> How about G17? That's a shape point.
Is this the biggest point?  <Svante> Looks natural, though you could have split the lower side with K3, too. Apart from this, G17 still is a nice point.
k4 seems a good move here, i really didnt want to m3 or 05.  <Svante> I would prefer to pincer a bit closer, because Black has no big aspirations in the left centre.
san san seems to give b a nice framework and  r10 being low is kinda annoying for w.  <Svante> Usually, I like the simple moves, too. However, in this handicap game, White may feel the need not to make things too simple. The immediate double approach doesn't seem too promising, too, so perhaps you have to find some way to jump out here. This might work with any of the marked points. White would be aiming at either the double approach on the right or a splitting move around G4. Creating a non-standard situation gives you opportunities to outthink your opponent.
i decided to activate this stone inmediately, not sure its a good idea.  <Svante> Apart from G17, I would tend to play C6, which is big.
<Svante> Splitting with Q1 would have a bit more implications for the corner.
Seems w came out fairly well, still weak but cant expect much more. Could do b better than the game?  <Svante> White isn't out quite yet. Except Q1 instead of P1, I don't think that Black had significantly better options here. Please note that even so, your corner is not unscathed. You didn't get these moves for free.
k6 seems a good move.  <Svante> I like it, too.
i couldnt find any shape better than this.
this  black move seems kinda slow.  <Svante> Look carefully. I will assume for now that you have read out that you can survive S5. However, because of R5, Black is quite strong now in this area as he can't be cut. White has not accomplished much except installing a weakish group.
i considered c6 too, but decided this was bigger.  <Svante> I am not so sure about that. C6 does stake out a chunk of the board for White, while this invasion just destroys a little of Black's potential and also likely produces another weak group.
Black 40 seems bad. w settles easily.
should b r17?  <Svante> Yes.
i was happy with this result  <Svante> Yes, it is good for White, because he has L17.
splitting looked important to me.  <Svante> I like this move.
<Svante> This doesn't help Black.
i thought this b move was kinda weird.
<Svante> These exchanges are very bad for Black.
to me it looked like b tenukied  too early.  <Svante> Yes, the interesting points seem to be at the right side, around N12. One could say that Black weakened his N15 stones with two moves "in preparation" for a tenuki, which is obviously not a good idea.
i wanted to make all my groups safe before focusing on territory. considered m13 too.  <Svante> I think that this is good, though G17 would be a good preparation first.
w 59 didnt work as i expected. b could cut it and i was busy for a while. considered f11 and d10 too.  <Svante> Why not continue the attack around M12? It is a very important shape point. Answering a shoulder hit is very basic and surely more urgent than fiddling around at other points here.
this was fairly good for b getting some shape in sente
Suddently im left with a  lonely group i didnt really want.  <Svante> Especially when you are behind, like when playing a handicap game, you have to develop a view on what is really the most important thing on the board. You will often need to sacrifice the second or third important thing to get it. Here, you want to attack the black stones on the top. Your stones on the left will have to wait - they cannot be neutralized with one move, and they make black feel uncomfortable with white moves around K11.
<Svante> Like this, you make these stones heavy.
i was a bit relieved because i feared b h11
<Svante> Finally. This was a very important point throughout the game.
i think b looked for eyes too early, his m13 group looks really weak now.
<Svante> Black should read carefully if his group really needs more moves. If so, taking the corner at B17 is a much bigger way to live, also because he wouldn't damage his outside position so much that way.
<Svante> I am not sure if Black can live with N17 now...
b 88 seems kinda offtopic to me. also it offers me the option to play d8 in sente
i could probably kill the upper group but i wanted to be 100% thick in the board to enter the yose firmly.  <Svante> Knitting together your outside groups seems a good idea, especially since It is not clear that Black can live even now.
considered o18, which was probably a better move
im aiming r13 and q8 with this move, also protecting the cut. At this point i felt i had a good game and didnt mind b living in gote.  <Svante> Q8 doesn't work at all, and R13 is just a few points reduction.
i thought about this a lotl, but i think i played the wrong move.  I see no reason not to play g4 now.
Black seems to be trying to defend against q8 in a way.  <Svante> Q8 is no threat anyway. You can rather assume that this is a preparation for S5.
i hadnt seen this.
l3 really pissed me off, it was so big.  <Svante> Good moves by Black.
i
i didnt expect b to tenuki r13 this is big and i need compensation now
<Svante> Black is not reading at all here.
i guess its fairly ok for white.  <Svante> No. It is fantastic for White, since he finally got rid of the S5 threat and made some nice territory.
connecting b18 seems sente for black, and huge.  <Svante> Huge yes, but I fail to see the sente.
this seems small compared to the corner(upper left)
<Svante> Why not connect?
was the corner bigger than this gote? i think so.  <Svante> I marked the areas that would likely change ownership. I think that it is a close call.
m12 and successive b moves look like misread.
weird.  <Svante> Not weird, just an oversight.
seems big enough to be game over.
smaller than corner.
<Svante> Black should play Q1 first.
here b resigned.  <Svante> Both players need to look more carefully. Especially Black has to build the stamina to keep his eyes open throughout the game. I know that this is hard. White should not assume that he can get moves like O2 etc. for free. Also, had Black taken a bit of advantage out of White invading at S15 with another group still weak, White would have had a much harder time.  Black also needs to avoid getting closed in. Bad moves in this respect were H16, O14, L15, G11. If he does get closed in, he needs to read very sharply to see if he has to add moves to live; then, he needs to find the moves that live in the least damaging way for the rest of the board. The moves around G9 and J11 were very bad in this respect.  I liked how Black handled the invasion at O2 etc. and how White calmly patched up his centre with N10.
I have never seen this before. Instead of A6 the usual play would be D7, however I could not find a good way to make use of it.  [K]: White lose good follow up in case black makes moyo here, see variation.
Here I am not used to this move. This was quite surprising.
"If someone attaches, do hane" I gave this a try.
[K]: Not sure this move is good now, your wall at E3 is not very useful now. See variation.
[K]: This cut looks bad, usually white connects at P3.
I am very sceptic about the last moves, but this was the best thing I could think of.
[K]: Now white is quite happy as he had 3 weak groups and now just 1 left.
[K]: I am not sure about this move, looks fine if you want to run with M6 stones later but if you plan to leave them you could probably play samething else.
My plan here is to get a huge moyo. Is this alright? K6 would have been my alternative, but I prefered the less aggressive play.  [K]: If you want to avoid fighting this looks ok.
[K]:Looks like to many moves in this area, taking corner might be better now.
I thought the timing is right to play this rather slow move.  [K]: I think this is biggest move now, if white invade corner he can take away a lot of points.
This was an interesting play of my opponent, again. L17 or L15
[K]: I don't like this move, you are strong in this area and this way white can survive easyly. See variation.
Quite complicated fight.
I am unsure about this move, is it ok?  [K]: Looks fine, hard to find anything better, anyway this result looks good for white.
How should you react to this?  [K]:The move in game looks fine.
Here I thought about giving him the corner and getting the side.  [K] might be right, it would be hard to kill all of white stones.
Here I could find a better idea than to put stress on the aji here and get stronger.  [K]: I think it is good move.
I think this move probably is a mistake.  [K]: Looks little strange but the aji you gained later was for sure worth it.
[K]: Good idea.
This turned out better than I thought. I felt quite behind until that point, and I don't know why. But this gave the hope and power to be able to turn this game.  [I think white could give up just part of the corner and safe his 2 stones. See variation.
[K]This is not big, B2 is much bigger.
Few  points and in sente for white, very big.
Here again, I saw some aji in the corner and tried to get a bit from it.
It's not sente, but it looks so huge to me. I think I am still behind, but I tried my best in endgame. Please let me know, if you can show me better moves.
There is same tesuji here. See variation.
Maybe this wasn't the best move, but it turned out good, thank to my opponent.  [K] Looks nice.
[K]:I think black played good game , i think that sametimes he was just 2 easy for white, giving him easy life at top and letting him to connect at P3 were probably main mystakes.
senin3son: k
Here I was trying out a new opening to lure w to me and fight it out though it doesn't work.  vlkplk: Playing on fifth line is realy non-standard. It`s too far from side to be useful for making territory there - white can safely play stone under it. But on the other hand, with its oritentation towards center, it could be helpful with connecting/escaping stones from different parts of board.  Why do you think `it doesn`t work`? Did you have some particular plan in mind?
vlkplk: Black D3 was big move, but I feel that black stones are little bit overconcentrated here. Black could play D15 or C11 or at other big point.
vlkplk: This looks like natural approach from white. Note, that black E11 is placed high, so white can slide underneath it.
vlkplk: As for now, I wouldn`t say that black`s `new opening` didn`t work.   Black D13 is nice point. But, consider 1)D13 and E11 look like to be too close to make effective formation. Would be better D13+E10/D10, 2)black`s would-be territory along left side is still open to invasion like around D9.
As you can see I wound up with the left side instead  vlkplk: It can`t be helped. But still there is use for two stones D16+D17, since they make blacks G18 senteh.  Drawback is that black side is still too much open. I would better capture white C14 immediaately, instead of playing B15. As a general rule, if there are two moves with almost same meaning, it`s better to choose one which captures opponents stones. Simply - there is always a chance that any stone would be useful later. So why not get rid of it.
vlkplk: Just reasonable response from white, trying to nullify blacks strong influence in center. Such white wall as E4-H4 can be usefull for supporting whites invasion deep to left side.
vlkplk: I think that best and most simple would be to connect with, say, F3 or F2 instead of H3. Than 1) if white blocks at H3, black tenuki and plays another big point elsewhere 2)if white doesn`t block, than possibility of H3 remains. Just better to stay connected.
vlkplk: This white move doesn`t separate black`stones.
with this I was able to grab some territory on the bottem  vlkplk: I think, this is not correct idea. While taking some few points along lower side, you have helped white making strong formation, which would interfere with your valuable center. There are much, much more points possible to take with, say G6 or the like.
here I was hoping to be able to get out to the middle and force w to play in the corner first.  vlkplk: `get out to the middle`: right. But, already you are in the middle, with E11 and D6 stones. Better to develop from that side.  `force w to play in the corner first`: wrong. Why you want white to play in the corner? Opposite strategy is better - not to help opponent fortify his corners, so as you can invade them later. As you know, it is 1)easy to survive in corner 2)easy to get points there.
vlkplk: This is exactly what black doesn`t want - white closes his corner, making about 15 or more safe points for himself, while it`s in senteh, because black has to defend his G3 group.
I made this so I could easly go to the middle or the right side if w played else where.  vlkplk: Basicaly, it`s right idea, but why you didn`t play on the right side directly, then? It`s still open territory, so black can safely play around R10, or attack upper-right corner, etc. Notice, how nicely white established himself in center during the process of pushing black G3 group.
vlkplk: Little bit submissive move from white.
vlkplk: Basicaly, why not, but black cannot expect getting points with this high placement. Why not to play on the third line?  As well, I would try to do some preparatory moves first. Look at lower-center white group - it has two nice cutting points to aim at. Ofcourse, making white connect at F4 means, that black loses his chance to connect underneath.
vlkplk: Compare this R12 to white R8. With R8 white 1) attacks Q10 succesfully (white gets senteh) 2) makes more points on lower-right corner and along side. While R12 makes nothing more than protecting Q10. What if white plays R14 next? Looks like the purpose of black stones is just to invade whites right side territory, in which case ONE black stone would be quite enough.
with this I was hoping to put pressure on w corner group and connect in the middle  vlkplk: 1) There cannot be much pressure put on whites corner. It`s perfectly safe. 2) On the contrary, by playing such move, close to opponents strong stones, you risk being attacked instead. 3) Right goal on the upper side would be to exploit two dead stones D17+D16 and try to nullify strong influence of whites upper formation.
vlkplk: Just natural attack from white. Note that while attacking, white is making his own territory along upper side. While black has just to escape, gaining zero.
here I was going for either invasion or to just reduce w potential territory  vlkplk: Right, but first you should play G18.
I am aiming for the middle now that I have suppressed w area in the top left.  Was this the best move to be made here or is there something better?  vlkplk: Basicly, right. Only that there is cutting point left at M14 can lead to some troubles later. Imagine white attacks R13 stones first, adding some whites stones in senteh and than cut at M14.
vlkplk: Black could prevent this move earlier and without any cost.
with this I figured was a good enough time as any to start a fight for the middle what is the correct answer w should make to properly protect the middle and possible force me into defense?
vlkplk: Strange move.
I was able to effectivly split w middle like I wanted while keeping my stones connected while setting up for my jump to j9
vlkplk: Now, white is terribly splited and neither of his two group is 100% alive yet.
I was wandering if it was the best time for w to set up this ko or should he have played else where first befort starting a ko?  vlkplk: It is nice ko for white and he doesn`t have to make any special preparation for it. 1) If white wins this ko, he gets some points in center and can attack black stones, 2)if white looses this ko, he looses just a few points.
with this I was hoping to connect my group to the top right and start my main struggle for the middle and put pressure on w f 7 group.  I was wandering if this was perfect timing on my part or should I have played else where? and what should w best answer to this be?  vlkplk; After white M12, it was high time for black to save his stones around H15. I think this was good choice, because pushing against whites M12 would lead to black O17 stones being captured.
with him taking the ko I went ahead and extended and prepare to jump to k11 though I am also aming to jump to n8 if needed  vlkplk: I think that it would be better instead to play N12 and connect his upper-right group with his right-side group. Than, white would try to save his E12 stones, whilst blacks middle have chance to escape with L8.
with this I got my wish and put tons of pressure on w's three stones and the f7 group
this also worked the way I wanted it to since I knew I wouldn't get th f7 group I built around it so I could easly capture the 3 w stones
here I was setting up to stay connected to the right and though I knew my two b stones under w's wall would be taken I was prepared for it and move to w's weaker group in the bottem right.
was this the right move to make to fight for territory?  vlkplk: Yes, contact moves like this one are good to quickly disturb opponenst territory. Provided that attacking stone has enough back-up in vicinity.
I had no choice here but to let w cut my two groups so I went ahead and settle my group with q8 here  vlkplk: It is question, whether white couldn`t kill all black`s stones after cut. They look rather weak...
With this I could prep for the fight and stay connected.
vlkplk: Please, notice the importance of F2. When white plays there, it is 1)senteh because threatens life of black group, 2)eates black`s points along lower side, 3) prepares for monkey jump towards lower-left corner. So, the importance of connecting stones along the side cannot be over-stressed.
vlkplk: Looks like minor move from white. Either C1 or O18 would have been nice moves.
here I was aiming to some how surround w four stones at L17 while keeping his two group split. I believed if I would have instead played o16 here I wouldn't be able to capture those 4 stones.
This was what I had wanted so I could aim to split w upper middle group.  vlkplk: I still wonder, how white could have lost his upper side...
vlkplk: This move was fatal for white. Since white`s middle group is already alive, it needs not to go connected. Would have white payed a little more attention, he wouldn`t have lost his upper...  It`s easy to see, why this is dangerous situation: there are too many cutting points - S15, S17, O17, there is tsuke at K17, and with Wg16 white added even one more cutting point at G17.
vlkplk: Just unbeliavable turn-over.
here I decidede not to be greedy and go for the L17 group and instead reduce w's territory in the top left.  vlkplk: Godd decision. In fact, it was enough that black splitted white formation into two. I would say, it was abou 20 points loss for white. And still, cutting points S15 and S17 can be utilized.
I decided to move here since w's f2 would cause me problems later.  vlkplk: Upper-lef was better. Reason: if white doesn`t defend, black can force him to capture two stones while getting senteh.
vlkplk: Notice, that due to the special features of corner, black could play a ko here with A18. Consequently, correct move for white to get corner was not B18, but A18. This technique is used quite often and worth to remember.
vlkplk: Here, the most secure answer for black was to play L2 directly. Not playing there was quite dangerous.
here w saw that his group would be in alot more trouble if he left the ko here open so he closed it giving me the advantage to taking over in reducing his territory  vlkplk: Well, now situation has changed and black has nothing to fear with loosing this ko. While white would loose about 3, 4 points. Still, white had some bigger moves to be played in senteh, for ex.: Q9, E1, G1?
vlkplk: Somehow, this corner looks strange. It needs some repair.
here I needed to create another ko so that I could use it to attack the upper right corner.  vlkplk: This is misunderstanding. You can`t use this ko for atacking some other place, because the value of this ko is exactly 1/2 point. It`s too small a ko. What is possible to attack here is white`s lower-right corner, with cut at Q3. Btw, connecting at P5 instead, there is another ko to take at N1.
I believe instead of playing p13 here I should have instead went for S17 and either split w's two groups or hopefully take the L17 group
this was the over cost of playing p13 here.
I started to tanuki this and play S17 to get the lead back but instead I decided to play M8.  Would it have been alright to tanuki and attack the top right?  vlkplk: It seems that top right is safe for the time being. There could be some chance, but black must first make an eye for his O18 stones. Otherwise, white`s group L19, which already has one eye, cannot be captured.
vlkplk: So black has lost a ko, which he could easily connect before...
guigsy: Normally black plays K4. R:Also I think K4 is better than F3. Your selected position (K4) is key stones for both side.
This is OK for me, because black's chinese formation is a bit flat.
guigsy: I am not sure how to play here. K3 or G3 feels much too submissive.
guigsy: This looked like a nice move, because I can play N4 to put pressure on the M3 stone or P4 to put pressure on the corner. I should just play normally, like in the variations. R:Separation of  black stones  would be best choice.
guigsy: This is an overplay. My group in the lower right is not strong enough. I can't see any good moves, though.
guigsy: My group is heavy.
guigsy: This is a bit slow, and helps me to get back in the game. Black should play L9.
guigsy: This is too early. I should keep my options open.
R: White should atari before this connection like in branch.
guigsy: I should just play O16. I then have one weak group against black's two. RI support your consideration.  This Nozoki is overplay. First, white should live own big stones.
R:white lost big chance by the selection (G8) instead of N13.
R: White chould  lay M2 instead of N2 like in the branch.
R:G6 is meaningless move. Now white has two week stones in the center and moreover the big long 15 stones.
R:G6 move  is no meaning, and  lost the game.
guigsy: I missed this tesuji. The game is over. R: This tesuji is general in IKKEN TOBI(one-space jump).   Thank you for your presentation.
P: seems too early for black to tenuki  panch:  Certainly it is not  joseki.   bottom right corner will be weak  and b  lost this game by this corner
f4 better
P: this move does not seem best  panch:  w has chosen not the best variant too
P: I think white got a slightly better result from the upper right exchange
22 vs 20  equally
d17  bad move for b   see r9, o4, f3  The top left corner is strong and not convenient  for attacks
wrong direction...
maybe better e16 for b and ko ?
again :)  e16 and c11 better
P: interesting move by black...
e6 for b look good!
l4  good point   for b or w
bad move without goal... if b plan to live  c3 better
why?  black is already  alive   and it is yose move  k4!
P: I struggled to know how to create an opportunity for white in the lower right.  see m2, h7, q4!  but I think p9 better  u must play in part of the board where u more stronger!  it is common rule in go
very little
I am not agree with this direction   this is the solid  move  but b makes solid shape too  see r7
b close territory  w got 1 point  this is not equivalence
P: the game seems tight but I judged white could win with komi.
m3 not work  b corner weak
P: perhaps white at A (m8) would be more interesting   n13 - bigger  and makes better shape
h12 good move   but h16 work  :)
P: both players keep making territory without much trouble, I still thought white could win but more spirit would have made the game more ointeresting.
maybe n15 ?
P: looking back this move seems awful, M8 seems better for white.
P: endgame plays seem urgent.    bad move  go elsewhere  +4 points  r19 !
P: probably these last 3 sequences are the losing moves for black who only defended.    only 2 points  see variant
P: not good by white...
?
why?
P: mistake by white, as I will soon learn a play at A (n1) is more urgent and bigger.  Yet white still wins by 7.5.  END OF COMMENTS
?
Do you know of a better way to play out the "joseki" from here?  > Bob: White 18 on E3 is not a joseki.  F3, F7 or F6 are moves that pro play here. Each of these moves prevent black to play on F6 what is key point here seems to me.  So, as your oponent missed to play in that way you could continue with more agressive Black 19 on F4.
> Bob: Was this to slow? I'd say it is. Maybe you could play 29 on K16 or F17?  What is idea of 29 on F10? Securing some points? It is not necessary to play this now as you are not in some danger here.   White 24 on F12 is good move, but  you don't need to answer on it with E10 or F10.  Yes, White can cut on B what means you can sacrifice two stones, or resist making small group at left side live.
> Bob: White made mistake. This is good, but yose move.
I felt A would have been better.  > Bob: Here you felt that something has to be done as White made mistake with slow (good for yose) move 34 on R18.  Too direct 35 on M17 let your opponent  to correct  his mistake.   As you suggest  35 on A (K17) is much better.  Than Black has two options : M17 or H17, following with Black F17 or M17 respectively.
> Bob: No, bad move, making White strong and escape. Better simple jump M15, besides all is now much more difficult for you. But don't forget you still can invade upper left corner. So, again too direct from your side.
Is expanding like this better than simply running with B instead of A? I thought this was better, but riskier.  > Bob: I am probabbly not much stronger player than you, but this is something what looks me very bad.  Letting White to connect underneath is wrong here. Also, playing contact move 45 on L17 make White strong on upper left area. So, why don't you left all here for future.
I feel the reason I lost was due to the few mistakes I made herethat easily cost me 20 points and sente. Do you think otherwise?  > Bob:  Agree with you. Here game was over for Black.  But at the end ??
Perhaps A would be better. Less territory (I think), but it seems much safer (orrather, I wouldn't kill myself here :) .  > Bob: Yes, I can understand what you mean with this. When you don't know some joseki it is difficult to play it from your head instantly. Then you sometimes improvise. And it is good strategy. Don't forget that go has milions of variations.   But, let's return to this move 63 on D18.  I am not sure this is bad. In fact, it seems to me you made best move here. Living here is impossible or some pro is able to find solution.  Until that, as you wrote, it was better for you to play with 3-3 invasion. Off course, I think you know this, so no comment on it.
Was there a way to live here?  > Bob: I don't know it. Maybe?  3-3 invasion was much better then this result.  You can find that 2-4 aproach is possible when side is free or yours, but I am not sure this is the case. Nevertheless, look at > http://senseis.xmp.net/?4463Enclosure24Approach    or try to find some more ...
I felt respoding to my opponent's moves were important here, but at the same time, I wondered if I was just being too passive. Was there any way to tenuki during the last 20 or so moves and achieve a better result?  > Bob: Maybe?  Not so important for the game. Also for your skill. I see you are good player during these moves, so don't try to find some big moves here for now. Not passive, good enough.
> Bob: "small" you say. Must be yoking. When you try to improve your skill it is important not to make such kind of mistakes in any circumstances. Sometimes it is only one move that you need to perform and game is on your side. Like this one, too. You noticed that, as result was on your opponent side.  Only 1.5 point, "small" was about 5. It is good to know that weak players sometimes loose only in middle stage or at the end of the game by this kind of "small" mistakes.
Overall, my game was fairly simple. I was wondering if there were any key points I missed that cost me the game? Also, did I make any big mistakes in yose? I know I made a couple "small" mistakes (i.e. "X"), but those were primarily due to time. I'm wondering about bigger endgame points. Thanks so much for commenting this!  > Bob: Yose is good.  Avoid "small" next time.  Good luck.
[Broege: Another common pattern is for Black to play A - this is known as Chinese Fuseki. Please refer to http://senseis.xmp.net/?ChineseFuseki if you want to know more about this pattern.]
mianreg [16k]: bon, on va se la jouer classique
[Broege: Black A seems to be a suboptimal choice now - the bottom side is very low after the joseki played. Please note that White B is not the most common answer - typically White would answer at C, making a higher position for himself.]
I don't know joseki so well either, so if you already have critics, please go on :o)
[Broege: This seems too far from the corner to be fully safe and at the same time not really pressuring White - so I would recommend A, B or C, depending whether you want to pressure White (A) or close the corner (B or C). But this is more a matter of taste than knowledge.]
[Broege: I always feel that White A is an overplay, aimed at tricking Black into the standard response - please see the variant two moves down for a possible continuation. Yet cutting at B is rather premature for Black (especially that the C stone is further off) as White shoould easily escape.]
Is this move a loss of time for w ?  [Broege: No, White should play a move to strengthen this group. I would rather expect a move at A. If White ignores this area and Black plays B, White will have a hard time keeping both his groups safe.]
Relevant ?  [Broege: Depends on your aim. If you wanted to cut White - it does not work, as shown by the next White move. If you wanted to put a stone as a forcing move - it can be, although I think A would be better - it still threatens to cut and is more strongly connected to the Black group above. Typical continuation for Black here is B - the corner group needs to be defended against White C. As it is unlikely that after Black B White will play a move around A (it would obtain only overconcentrated stones), Black should finish his shape with B and wait with A or the move played for later.]
[Broege: This obtains nothing important. The two Black stones does not form a wall with the corner group (they are not connected strongly enough), nor do they take any territory. The only thing they do is to solidify White group so White does no longer have to worry about it - not something Black should do.]
[Broege: Imagine this position without the triangled stones. Isn't it better for Black? Black stones are practically the same and White still needs to worry (even if only slightly) about his side group.]
[Broege: This is an overplay - extention at A would be safe.]
Here, I don't really know what to do. My own stone left is in a pincer. I may attack, but if you see the result in the game, I get caught...
I chose : flee and surround...  [Broege: You can't flee and surround the White stone at the same time, at least not yet. So Black is left with two main choices: A - to escape into the centre quickly B - to dive into the corner, expecting White C, and then escape Black can also play D to put some pressure on White pincer - but after White E Black is still in danger.]
[Broege: Black move at A left a cut (as marked) - so he needs to be careful in his escape into the centre.]
[Broege: White is expoiting Black weakness by large extentions - and Black cannot cut as it would put his marked group in grave danger.]
[Broege: Such a large extension from a weak group is rarely good. White can cut if he chooses so (imagine for example White A, Black B, then C, D and E) - so Black does not really put pressure on White stone. And if there is no pressure applied and the stone does not strengten own group - why play such a move anyway? Perhaps a move at F would be better? It protects all the cuts and cannot be easily ignored by White. Of course it gives White some solid shape - but that's to be expected following Black overplay at G.]
[Broege: This stone can be disconnected (as shown in the game). I understand that you rejected A as being too slow - and perhaps rightly so. In such a situation Black should first cover his cutting points with a few forcing moves (B, C, perhaps D) and only then try to apply force to White stones.]
[Broege: This is a very costly mistake - Black allows to cut off his stones and they are already almost captured. Perhaps playing A and sacrificing the ataried stone would be better? Please see the variation. Automatically protecting a stone in atari is a dangerous instinct - your opponent will for sure make some use of that.]
Obviously a mistake  [Broege: I would call it "a nice try" - even if it was not executed properly. Please see the variations.]
For I guess I would lose my stone in this area, I get the corner as a little compensation.  [Broege: Good thinking if you were sure to loose your stones. Of course saving them would be better ;-)]
b14 wrong ?  [Broege: B14 is OK here - it cannot be cut and it gives Black some more space to live in.]
[Broege: It is not needed - see the variations at the previous move. So it's much better to take some bigger move now - perhaps A or B or E or C+D sequence.]
A18 is gote, so...  [Broege: A18 is not needed, is it? My first choice would be D but A also seems OK (well, it was one of the four ideas a move back).]
Tricky but I consider it as dubious, for I get thickness in the center, to a giant moyo.  [Broege: You need to use the thickness you obtain. For me this seems a sound strategy for White - at least assuming that Black is much weaker and thus will not be able to put this thickness to a good use. For evenly matched players - I would have reservations but still not reject this move.]
[Broege: How about A? It protects the corner and puts some good pressure on White. Of course it means an all-out fight between the marked stones so Black should check he knows what he's doing.]
[Broege: Forcing moves first. After Black plays A White will have to connect to the upper group and Black will take the corner and a wall on the outside.]
[Broege: White has gained quite a lot - it destroyed a good chunk of Black potential territory and what's more converted it to White territory. Black's moyo is still only a moyo and not territory. White can play cut at A and take another chunk of Black territory or play forcing moves at B, C and then invade somewhere around D and hope that he will be able to escape upwards or to the left or to live inside. If White does not want to risk everything with such a deep invasion he can reduce at E or play the cut at A.
[Broege: Another way to play a reduction.]
From that point I guess there are lots of mistakes to come right in the center, and I lose a big part of my moyo.  [Broege: Not yet knowing what lies ahead I would expect that even without any Black mistakes the moyo will be greatly reduced.]
Is L10 solid ? I couldn't read through it.  [Broege: Do you mean "can Black cut?". Let's see the variations. Definitely Black can cut - but in the following fight White will be probably better off.]
What else ?..  [Broege: You can also try to counteratack - for example by playing A. White will connect (if not he will have to live inside Black moyo and then it is slightly weaker. Or you could play B and try geta for the next move - as in the variant shown a move earlier.]
[Broege: A bad mistake in a typical shape - atari at D threatens to capture 4 stones.]
Thithus [6k]: aÃ¯e mianreg [16k]: horreur Thithus [6k]: c'est le trou noir, c'est le trou blanc Thithus [6k]: dommage Thithus [6k]: c'Ã©tait presque Ã§a ! mianreg [16k]: j6 aurait fait l'affaire
I am not really familiar with this black move. Could you show me a few common variations?
FM: this white move looks like the shapepoint, but is probably not very good. White wants to force black to connect his stones while protecting the corner
FM: this move looks natural, I think its ok
FM: better to play A directly, leaving more aji
The game move is E, but i thought about A-D, too. Where would you play?  FM: D and F are the main white weaknesses black should aim at - I would strenghten the lone stone at A or B
FM: too hasty
I this the vital point?  FM: This move tries to attack white too much, but doesnt cause white real trouble. Just playing simply A or B was better.
Ladder breaker.
Is this a good move?  FM: I think if white defends correctly, he comes out with the upper hand - black marked stone was a mistake.
FM: black is happy to connect here
I was very happy to play here.
This move captures white 3 stones, attacks white bottom group and expands the black moyo. It also induce black to play F4 fix.  FM: black is very happy with this
FM: the marked sente exchange is a reason for a small celebration
My idea was that after A-B-C-D-E the black moyo is big. Is this a good idea?  FM: This move is ok, black is in the lead now
I did not expect this move. How should black answer?  FM: there are two basic answers for this kind of shape: A and B
Is this aji-keshi?  FM: giving up the A move makes B much bigger now - you should play this move only if you want to continue at B.
My idea was that A and B are miai now.  FM: after white naturaly answers at B, this move and A won't be really big.
I did not expect this move. How should black play now?  FM: this move is extremely huge. If black cannot get any compensation by attacking white now, the marked exchange was a huge loss. To start an attack, I think A is good now, it is locally quite big and efficiently removing white eye base on the side, forcing him to run away - black hopes to chase white a bit and take some profit on the left.
FM: if white doesn't die, this move is not worth much
FM: forcing white to take points on the side, white not building much
Is this an overplay?  FM: usualy white plays more solidly, there are very bad aji left in the corner now
FM: although this shape looks natural, it actualy is very bad. White should be always very careful when playing this tiger mouths
FM: black needs a little preparation first
Is this result ok for black?
This move is very stupid. The corner is already alive!  FM: actually, it was a thousand year ko shape
Now the black 4 stones feel bad.
Black has bad shape.
This and the next few black moves are very very stupid.  FM: just simple connecting at E12 was enough here
I played this and the next 2 moves to assure the connection of the black group.
I think after this move, black is alive (in sente).
FM: better to connect at A, so that white can continue at B.
FM: is black is already alive, just protecting these three stones in gote is small
I suddenly became unsure of the life of the black center group, so i played here to ensure life. I think this is a game-losing move.  FM: unfortunately, not answering the S7 move is about twenty points loss
I misread black S11. Very stupid >_<
This is impossible.... I think this is the final game losing move.
I felt behind, so i played ko. There was byoyomi pressure, so all the moves are (even) worse now.
FM: this black missed the last chance to defeat white easily. From now the endgame begins. I hope you liked my review and I wish you many enjoyed games!
pmurphy [9k]: thanks for playing meadowlane [5k]: hi
rs220675: Not good, see var.
rs220675: Good!
pmurphy: is foiling the bamboo joint here lower urgency than I thought it was?  rs220675: I don't know what a bamboo joint is :) but it looks good for black here, white is heavy and not alive - two things that are huge in the fuseki.
rs220675: Too slow. Try to fill bigger spots. One of the worst mistakes is to make such small moves in the fuseki or early game (if they are not necessary), because in this stage of the game it's almost impossible to secure area for sure. When you play small have at least one more goal like playing at P3 to secure the corner and attack the white stone at O3.
rs220675: Good!
rs220675: That's not bad, but not good either, see var.
rs220675: Good!
rs220675: Too small. You don't need tp play such a move right now. Even if there's an invasion e.g. at M17 you have enough options., see var. for better moves than M16.
rs220675: Not really good, because white lives and black is heavy and not settled, see var.
pmurphy:  I was expecting a straightforward 3x3 invasion.  At this point I didn't think there was anything I could do to save it, but I tried anyway at the end since I was behind and didn't have anything to lose but more points.  rs220675: See my variation of how you should have played.
rs220675: No really efficient. It doesn't secure the 3-3 area there, but it's also kind of small...better play big at K4.
rs220675: That's ok, though I would prefer K4 or J3.
pmurphy: right direction here?
rs220675: G3 would have been better and more simple to avoid any insecurities of cuts there.
pmurphy: on reviewing this, I think the other hane would have been better  rs220675: Both is possible to play here.
pmurphy: i think the other hane would have prevented me from "pushing the cart from behind" here...still, I felt L4 was too big to leave to give up.
rs220675: Not good since you provoce a kofight that is not in your favor (because you lead)...play better at S6.
pmurphy: I was thrilled to have survived, but any input you can give me on resisting that invasion would be great.  rs220675: Well you couldn't resist this invasion because you allowed White to put some stones there earlier, but that's ok. Never forget: You can't have everything, you have to give away some areas too. Right now it looks good for black.
rs220675: Not good! Don't give your opponent cutting points if you are not sure it's an advantage, play better at D12.
pmurphy: at this point I was feeling pretty good about things, I was confident I could live in the west, hold on to the northeast corner, and soak up enough of the center to give white a run for her money.  rs220675: Well that's pretty much how we weak players think :). We emphasize too much on one area and its territory. But good players still could easily invade in your upper moyo. The two marked stones you could have used to attack at the marked positions with more benefit longtermwise.  Also you seemed completely to have forgotten your upper stones around D17. They are dead and that gives White a huge benefit. It's just that one looks always at the big upper moyo and underestimates the big points White gets at the left upper side (with all the prisoners).
rs220675: Better at H4, otherwise see var. what could happen.
rs220675: see var.
pmurphy: there must have been a better way for me to handle that.  Variation please?
pmurphy: an impulse move, a bad habit of mine.  I was trying to deprive white of an eye at G13, but I had no good reason for doing so, since that group was alive.  rs220675: Never do this move again :).
pmurphy: this move floored me.  I couldn't successfully cut now, and I was on the run.  rs220675: Well, because B10 was weak again. Your building of the upper moyo neglected other areas of your game like patching weak spots and the upper left side. And NOW it is payback time for White.
pmurphy [9k]: you mind if i submit this game for a review on the go teaching ladder?
meadowlane [5k]: not at all
pmurphy [9k]: sweet.  I can tell this one's gonna givew me some things to ponder.  hehe
pmurphy: not a very good move maybe, but I was starting to think maybe I had better make sure I had an eye left around D12  rs220675: Well from now on teaching is not very senseful anymore, because usually at your level, any mistake now is just triggered by a more fundamental mistake before, so I will just point out very obvious things now.
pmurphy: best response?  rs220675: Well ,the spot was just weak and White explored it, so I guess your answer was ok.
pmurphy:  I feel like I was really getting pushed around here, I was no longer feeling as good about my score as I was.  My only source of optimism at this point was the thought that I could eat into white's potential territory around H9
pmurphy: on reflection this was a bad move, I should have gone for a solid connection or maybe a one-space jump  rs220675: Yes, it was bad. Play at J10 or J9 or K10.
pmurphy: I think J10 would have been better  rs220675: Yes.
pmurphy: reasonable exchange?  rs220675: Well, yes...these three white stones were huge, esp. because it creates a further threat for White.
pmurphy: seeing that I was behind, I figured a desperate attempt to save my northwest group would be educational at least.  My thinking here was maybe I could get some extra tempo by threatening the C13 or B17 groups.  rs220675: This group is only living when two 20k's are playing :). No way, but sure one can try....
pmurphy [9k]: crap, misread that one pmurphy [9k]: heh
JS: The slide by white is a little bit strange, fixing the shape too much
here I was thinking of playing around n4 but was afraid of ending ins gote while k16 still seems like a huge point I wanted to get.  JS: Stabilising the corner is good for black in this situation. The A,B exchange by white not only loses the possibility of taking the whole corner by invading directly at B, but also makes the white stones a little bit heavy
I like my position so far, as I find k4 strange  JS: True
Here I never know what the best way is
I was not too happy, but at least he is on the 2nd line
Is this move correct at this point? I usually play this move if I can because I am afraid of the shimari :)  JS: Playing a kakari cannot be bad when all corners are already occupied. The high kakari which you played is also especially good in this situation because the center is interesting for white and she has no effective pincer against it  JS: The two marked stones indicate that white is going to play a moyo game because the hoshi can be easily invaded. So the center and especially the left side is more important for white
Here I was not completely happy since this shape I usually play when I can build a moyo which is not really possible in this game any longer
JS: This is a good point for white
I played this to explore m3 weakness, but after playing it I felt it probably was a mistake. Should I go for 3-3 invasion instead?  JS: I think your idea is good and better than immediatly invading the corner, because you make miai of playing at the left and the right side
JS: This result is good for black because the shape of the 4 marked stones looks even stranger
JS: This move usually is not good for black
JS: Black is playing against his marked stone
I played this because I thought I need to defend the r17 peep and this seemed to be the most active way to do so.  JS: The problem is, that this sequence is not really sente
JS: Not neccesary by white
I guess this is an important point to look for better direction than I did.
JS: This just creates a weak group which black at best would like to throw away :-)
here I felt like I began to struggle  JS: Maybe you are too fixed on securing the two marked stones :-)
I played this sequence because I was afraid of a white territory in the middle.  JS: Your position is very thin but not easy to calculate
This move was probably not possible... I got lucky
Now I created two weak groups which will ultimatively harm e5 group as well.
Now I felt secure again. Somehow I lost most of the big points in endgame.
JS: The last big endgame point. It is amazing, but it makes a difference of 16 points wheater you, or your opponent gets to play this move. Now the position looks quite equal, maybe a little bit better for white
JS: Probably white's loosing move
After this I was rather confident.
QUESTION : better at P4 ?  Yes P4 is better.  If you want to pincer, R12 or Q11 tend to be a little better.  The difference is pretty small though.  I show some variations.
QUESTION : big mistake ! Better at R19 ?  R19 is fine, although many players prefer Q19, because with R19, White has S19 in sente later in the game.
Mistake for white.  Just capture.
Not needed.  White can't cut.  Now would be a perfect time to play P4, E4, or C10.
QUESTION : better at P4 or D10 ?  This is fine.  P4 looks a little better because it works with the black wall at Q11, but it's not a huge difference I don't think.
This white move is too loose.  Black can still invade, and reach out towards the stones on the right side.
Good move, builds territory along the left side.
I think black can afford to be a little more aggressive here.  I added a variation at P4.
Accomplishes little.  Consider G17, J10, or Q6.
QUESTION : better N17 ?  No.  M15 or O12 are possibilities.
I think it's better to block at O12.
Now black must struggle to live.
This move doesn't do much.
Good.
Not needed.
Also not needed.  The stones on both sides are alive.
Too small.  Maybe 1 or 2 points.  C17 is still wide open for invasion.  If you J13 or somewhere similar is also large.  T14 is probably 7 or 8 points.  S5 is bigger, about 5 or 6 points.  B8 is bigger, also about 6 points.  F2 is bigger, and L2 is bigger.  Capturing a single stone is almost always too small for this stage in the game.
Way too small.  Filling in a 1 point ko should be your last move at the very end of the game.
zero points.
Zero points.
Zero points.  In fact, you're pushing white into your territory, so maybe this is negative points.
Good.  This is the move you should have played 10 moves ago!
J13 may be a little better.
Too small.  This move is 2 points in gote.  J14 is much larger, maybe 10 points.
L17 kills all three stones.  See variations.
Again, better to cut at L17 and kill the black stones.
Not needed.
Nice move.  Very sharp.
F13 gives W less room too fight.
QUESTION : Then I will crowl on the top ... my big moyo is vanihing ! How should I have played to keep it ?  In general, when you have a group completely surrounded like this, you should try to kill them by leaving no space for eyes.  I like G16 or E13.  I show a few variations.  It will be tricky, but you can probably kill them.
Attaching underneath is weak.  Peep at G16, then follow with G17.
Still bad.  Play E17 to salvage the top left corner.
Very small move.  1 point or less, and in the middle of a life or death battle!  E17 keeps the pressure on white.
Ok, it's the endgame now.  Here are big plays you should always look for:  2nd line descents: A, B, and C.  This moves give you more points, and are almost always sente because they threaten a monkey jump (see next).  Note C is actually gote, but it's still a good move because it blocks White. The point value varies, but it's genverall about 6 points.  Monkey Jumps: D and E.  These are very big, about 8 points, less if there are more white stones blocking.
Zero points.  You can kill that stone whenever you want.
Good.
Good, but the monkey jump is a little better.
Good.
P1 instead.
Good.
Good.  P14 may be a little better.
Mistake.  playe T12 to save the stone.
stepwise [4k]: hi hf paxrom [4k]: hi
Wrong side. A or B are better options.
I think an attachement here let yor opponent make sabaki too easily
too heavy. A or B would be better
good direction
a very abusive move. white should settle his A group first
I know this move is standard with the chinese opening bur since black has one more stone at A, you should be more aggressive by playing at B
although it cannot be called a bad move, i think d8 goes too easy on white. White has a very weak group so you should attack him more severly. e7 and e8 might be better options
this move is bad. It should be at
this is a bad move. it helps white a lot
you should forget about this stone and jump at A instead
now black has 2 weak groups, and who is attacking who is unclear, while at the beginning black was attacking white. This is a great loss for black
this is a bad move
bad move that leads to an elephant eye shape
now blak has a serious problem
very bad move
broken shape. this is awfull for black
an elephant eye again. In this fight we see that your shapes are not good. If you want to have an easy fight, you should have a better understanding of shapes
here i don't see a way for black to live
now the game is over
black is a lot behind, if you want to have a chance to win, you can't play this kind of defensive move, you should be extremly aggressive
stepwise [4k]: gg
Was a play at A also good ?  Both are playable  bur i prefer at A more   If white 6 at k 16 i will play with 7at k4
What I was expecting.
I thought something like A was too slow, but it now appears to mean as a really strong move, making a moyo on the right, helping both my aboves stones and the bottom 3-4 stone. What do you think ?   - So you should play with 7 at S14 - Black can also play 15 at  n4
Well. Crawling at A was probably too submissive. So I intend to make a moyo on the bottom right.  Crawling at A is ok , black connected will above group, white has to build a gruop on the center , laster on black can lanch the attack
White stones still under pressure...  -yes
The first move that I can't really explain... What is the best here ? I just don't wan't him to have a base here, and I'm trying to help my stones to because I found that playing at A was too dangerous and gave bad shape.   - i don' know the  best but this move is ok
Hum... Forced to do that right ? Or is there something better ?  - i would connect at s11
Useless ?  - you should play at O 15
Safer to connect...  - Black 31 is useless now
Black 7,13 is collasped
Thanks to white I became a quite strong shape.  - yes
Hum... Trying to complete the moyo and have territory on the bottom. Is there something better ?
Really too deep I think !
Big mistake don't you think ? Should be at A !  - yes
White is happy...  yes - Blac triangle worth 30 point, it is a house(like black 19) , not a soilder(like black 7)  i don't know you unserstand my meaning or not :P
Preparing to attack.  - Black is too wak , he cannot attack
Wrong timing ??  Attack at m 4 is better
Now I have almost a huge moyo in the center ! But this is a mistake I think.
White was nice...
I didn't find anything else...
Forced to connect right ?  =sure
Here I don't know how to play.
-too passive
Was that ok ? I have some doubts...  - you should surround the would group , capturing 3 stone is not big
as a result black 77 help  white stronger and black is over concentrated
No choice...
White A could be embarassing, right ?  If white play A , black can live by c4
I think there could have been a good ko for white if he play A ad I didn"t answer...  White should play 112 at A if black try to capture 3 white stones white can surroung big territory at the bottom
Overplay...
Playing A followed by B was probably decisive...   Right
Hello!  My name is Ádám Bencsik (Tommyclaw on KGS).My rank is 14k, and i played this game against a 13k player, with 0.5 points komi.  tsjanl: Hi, my name is Jan-Willem Swane (nick: tsjanl). My rank is 7k NL.   I concentrate my review on general concepts, not on a lot of variations. There is always a difficult step when you are at your strength from fighting locally to viewing the whole board situation. I hope my comments will offer you a help in developing into that direction.  The review ends at move 103. Enjoy.
tsjanl: This is a bit slow to my taste.   I would like to play at the marked spot (see variation).
tsjanl: I do like an approach from the bottom better, because the top is more secure. You play towards your strenght (see variation).
tsjanl: With this move, you are giving a perfect formation (a three point jump from a two stone wall).
tsjanl: Because white already had the perfect placed stone on R10, he has the possibility to play on this nice point.
Is it okay to do a 3-3 invasion now?Because...  tsjanl: No, I don't like this invastion. It gives white the possibility to build a wall that works perfect wiht the stone on k4. I would still prefer a play on the marked spot.
In general it's considered bad to create territory on the second line, because the opponent gets too much in return (a strong wall). Usual is the variation that starts at the marked spot.
...this way white has a wall on both sides.  tsjanl: Black has helped whtie to form a huge amount of influence, that works good with the other stones on the bottom.
tsjanl: With the move you play, you are pushing from your strong group on a strong group of white. In general that is not really urgent. The big move is still at the marked spot.
tsjanl:This really hurts black. Compare the influence of the move you played (and white didn't have to answer) with the move white plays.
tsjanl: This move has lost a lot of influence now that white has a stone at k17.
tsjanl: Black rather would like to extend to j17, but k17 prefends that. Besides h17 induces a move that white already would like to play...
tsjanl: It's advisable to pause a few times during the game and evaluate the whole board situation. Now that the opening is finished, this is a good moment. Good things to look at are territory, influence and weak groups.  Black has more territory than white (compare the squares and triangles.  On the other hand, white has a lot more influence than black, especially in the lower half of the board. If white can get a stone on b8, he will get a lot stronger on the left half. My evaluation is that white's strength at this moment easily compensates for his lagging behind in territory.  The groups I marked with a circle are weak. The black group in the upper left is especially weak, because white has a stone on the second line (b18), that can rip the black group of a base. The two white groups are weak because there are black groups nearby.  What are black's possibilties now? I think the best thing to do in the long run is trying to prevent white forming a big moyo in the lower half. Good spots for that ar A and B.  But before that there are two things urgent. Firstly, he has to make his weak group more secure. And secondly he has to create more strength in the center, so that A and B will have more chance on success.  I would start with a move at C. This move has three purposes (the more purposes a move has, the better it is in general): making his group stronger, attacking white's weak group and getting more influence in the center.  Another good point to look out for is D. It's is threathening the other white weak group, while getting more influence on the outside. I'll come to that later.  A possible continuation is in the variation.
tsjanl: I like this less than a play on J15. You are driving white's weak group in the direction of your weak group and that is dangerous.
tsjanl: this is a move that strengthens white more than it strengthens you. These kinds of moves are called 'thank you moves, because you are inviting white to play at a spot where he would like to play anyhow.
tsjanl: You should only play this move if you have a reasonable cerainty you can kill white. Otherwise you are strengthening white. And by that, you are weakening your corner.   Locally I would like a move at q9. See variation.
tsjanl: This doesn't work, as you have noticed. You are inviting white to get into your corner.
Tsjanl: ouch.
tsjanl: You better leave the two stones now and defend your corner.
tsjanl: You are strengthening white.
tsjanl: You are lucky: white should start harrassing your group at the top.
tsjanl: But now you pay for strengthening the white group at the right.
tsjanl: Thsi doesn't work. You better leave the three stones on the board as ko threaths.
Is there a way to save all the stones in the corner?
tsjanl: idem.
tsjanl: Do you see how first strengthening white group at the right forces you to defend your corner, which helped white to turn his moyo into territory? White has gained a lot since we evaluated the position.
tsjanl: This doesn't work. The important part of the board is the lower half.
tsjanl: I think this move wins the game.
I wanted to reduce white's moyo, but i was not sure how to do it.  tsjanl: You waited too long. In general, you played too much for territory and had not enough eye for forming strength aimed at the center. When you manage to play a more balanced game, your play will become much stronger.  Here I do end my comments. I hope they are helpfull for you.
euGOchan [6k]: hi euGOchan [6k]: gg kozan [3k]: hi
euGOchan [6k]: played here to stop his enclosure and also to reduce c16's enclosure  DG: This is a good move. A kakari like c6 would be ok too.
euGOchan [6k]: would q10 be better?  DG: Well I think k3 is ok, but...
DG: This is not a bad move.
euGOchan [6k]: k5 be better? why?   DG: I don't know :)... I like B too. So I don't know wich of them is better. But A or B is important.
DG: This doesnt feel right. Ajikeshi.
DG: This feels too heavy for W. I think 22 was an overplay.
euGOchan [6k]: quite happy with the last few moves   DG: Sorry but I dont feel satisfy with B's position. Go is a game about surrounding, points and stones... Wich means to "close them from the center". and the marked stones can't go to the center now. Yes, you've like 20 points on the corner, but I think you could have done better. (See Var. at move 21 and 23).
DG: That was very big, W is ahead now... A or B feels right.
DG: This only made one more weak group.
euGOchan [6k]: not sure about this one  DG: Take a look at var at move 48.
DG: Let's compare what happens if you dont do this move.
euGOchan [6k]: was it better to escape or should i have prevented white from taking k17?  DG: Take a look at the variation and explanation at move 49.
DG: very good move.
DG: This is no so good by W, he should let the aji at A and B
DG: W should ignore.
euGOchan [6k]: a10 for black better?  DG: yes, a10 is better. But the real problem came after moves 85 and 91 .
euGOchan [6k]: is the j14 group alive already? should i have left it and just played g7 to connect instead?
DG: This is way to painful to A and B. Ignoring the tsuke at 104 was better.
DG: This was a good move.
euGOchan [6k]: whats the correct response here? euGOchan [6k]: is it this variation:
DG: A was no good. Your variations are better.
euGOchan [6k]: how to make the upper left corner live?  DG: :) no way to live, sorry. You just gave up to the sente move at a16.   ---- This is my last comment, go to the move 0 to see my opinions.
euGOchan [6k]: whoops  DG: :)...
Bernard64 [6k]: hi
* This is my standard opening. The idea is to created a stable corner in the upper right hand corner while at the same time threatening a move like R10. In my games, white's most common replys were:  1) The wedge at R10,  2) The kakari at Q5, or  3) The kakari at R5  See the variations for how I would respond to each of these moves.   [Reviewer Comment]: A normal response is R9 actually.  It's a point of Miai makes black's attacks less effective(see variation).  All the other plays are fine as well.  Q5 is very popular.  Again it's personal preference if you know a lot of variations on how to reduce Moyo.
Most frequently I see the wedge, my response to this is either:  1) R12, or  2) R8  Which is better?  See the variation and the game line for my thoughts.
This sequence is also gote, and is the one I followed in this game. I like it because it doesn't leave a glaring weakness in my shape like the other sequence with R12 did. However, I dislike it because it is gote and gote in the opening, which is especially bad.  Is R5 too passive?  What are better moves here?  [Reviewer Comment] It's territory minded.  P8 would be more ambitious and more balanced.  All you plays are on the 3rd line.  Remember 3rd line for territory and 4th line for influence.  But again this is personal preference.  Don't forget about the center in your following moves.   That's all.
[Reviewer Comment] Good play on whites part.  The biggest point on the board so far.
Is this the right kakari, or would C14 have been better?  [Reviewer Comment] I would go with c6 actually.  Prevent white form a big moyo on the lower left.  But F17 is a perfectly fine move.
[Reviewer Comment] K16 leaves more flavor.  D18 is on the second line.  It's okay if you want to settle this part.  But I think you will gote at the end.
[Reviewer Comment] Too impatient.  D18 seems odd now.
[Reviewer Comment] C11 would have been better. B10 would be sente later on.
[Reviewer Comment] F4 could be J17 as well.  Make a weak group out of black.
Which side is leading in the opening at this point? and how do you tell?  [Reviewer Comment] Too early to tell.  So just be patient and play normal.  Black chose to get territory so white  has more influence.  Center is going to the deciding factor now.
[Reviewer Comment]  Odd move.  Very bad for black.   Now 3-3 is not possible anymore.  Also you don't get much outside influence.  It's a big waste to play this move so early.
The start of the midgame in my opinion.  Black attacks the shape weakness at H3 leading to this...
Is there a better way for me to get out?  [Reviewer Comment] No.  White is happy now because he doesn't have to worry about you forming a moyo around P6 area.   Also he got a lot of territory on the lower left.  So this exchange is bad for black.  Again D5 is really bad move.
[Reviewer Comment] Good timing
Now my plan here was to build thickness and attack the R13/R10 group, but it didn't really work..
White slides in to solidify his position before Black can attack.  Should I have attacked at R12 instead of making the move at O13?  [Reviewer Comment] M12 is urgent.  White is too greedy here.  You don't have to respond to moves that not threaten you much.  R12 is not reasonable.  It's hard to attack white's R13 group from the start.  You can threaten and build you influence on the outside.  To kill is again too much.
[Reviewer Comment]  Q15  is very small.  Attach white's weak group now.
I felt that F10 was bad, what was the proper way to connect, and was this move even needed?  In a broader way, I want to know how to decide which moves to make in the midgame and endgame, how do I calculate how many points or how big each move is?  [Reviewer Comment] There is no need.  It's in no danger.  S9, T15, B19 are much bigger moves.
Starting here, white pushes me with all these little endgame moves, but since this game was close I think it was White's endgame/yose that won the game for him. White ended up winning by 2.5.  So could you examine my yose and see what I could have done better.  What I especially want to know is how to badger my opponent in sente.  [Reviewer Comment]  Yose is actually simpler, but you have to look at the whole board before making a move.  Blindly follow will lead to defeat..  For example, you can well play B19.  It's just as big, if not bigger.  That way you don't lose out on yose.  You get a big point, I get another one.  Even-steven.
[Reviewer's Comment]  Again this bad habit.  This is the same move as D5.  If K19, L19, J19, K17, the difference is 6 points in sente.
[Reviewer's Comment]  G1.  End of comments.
YusufS [6k]: hmmm YusufS [6k]: close YusufS [6k]: but I think you win by about 4.5 Bernard64 [6k]: let;s find out YusufS [6k]: hmm oh well let's see anyways
peterchris [4k]: hi hf
Jay: This move is not proper.  The proper move is F4 or F3.
Hi, I played black. Please comment on the cut at move 13 (black) briefly.  But more important, I felt that at move 63 black had a won game, but was not effective at making use of it.  Was this a won black game at move 63?  What would have been the right approach from move 64?  What would be possibilities for how white would respond?  There's no need to review the rest of the game before or after, just move 13 and move 64 area.  Thank you very much!!! Peter  Jay: This cut makes very complicated fight to follow. Normal response is F5 followed by pincer of C8 stone.
Jay: Tough fight.
Jay: This W move leaves weakness.
Jay: W has no time for this move.
Jay: B heads toward win. Now the real question is, as it played out W actually almost won the game until a low level mistake was make toward the end that caused an upset for W. This is your puzzle I suppose.
Jay: Before going further, let's count the profit and against W's potential of the wall.    LL corner and left side has given B 43 pts. The two other B stones and sente worth about 16 pts. W's wall and and Q4 stone will have to worth 60 pts.  This is tough. The wall has weakness (cut) that reduce its effectiveness.
Jay: This is playable too.
Jay: This is a funny move.
Jay: This has given W some territory in the center and the two cuts are no longer problem for W. But, B has solid 100 pts now. W has to completely take the center and the LR corner.
Jay: As you have analyzed, this move is too greedy.
peterchris [4k]: thanks, well played
Gwyel [-]: have a good game
Aki [13k?]: You too.
Gwyel [-]: I just got deja vu
Aki [13k?]: lol
al> white streches a bit too far to secure the corner. if that was the purpose, the stone should have been placed at A.
al> Up until move #14 the game looked pretty normal. Now, with the white triangle marked stones played on top of the black stones along the board edges, it appears as if white is trying to make a moyo in the center. This is, of course, extremely difficult, and even so, it would be wise of white to make some bases at the edge of the board first - it is almoste impossible to live inside an area completely surrounded by enemy stones.
Aki [13k?]: I'm not doing too good...  al> The three tringle marked stones have an unfortunate shape, in that if black plays at A, there are two cuts (numbered) to protect. (This happens a move #97, which proves the point, even if black fumbles it)
al> White has a chance to cut at A, separating the black  stones into two groups. The leftmost group (trianlges) can of course run out into the center, but now white's square marked stones would serve the purpose of preventing the black group from connecting to the left.  al> if the aim with white M16 is to split the black stones at K17 and P16, it is placed a little off. It would do a better job at B or C. Since black can run along the border with a one space extension, the resulting shape gets hard to attack.
Gwyel [-]: actually
Gwyel [-]: this is going well
Aki [13k?]: i have a feeling you're tearing me apart
Gwyel [-]: you're underestimating yourself
al> White N18 at A would be from the right direction. Now, the two white stones are doomed.
al> white O18 does not accomplish anything other than making black reinforce the top right corner. When a group is beyond salvation, like the triangle marked group, it is better to leave it, instead of forcing the opponent to capture. Even if it gets captured in the end, it may serve the purpose of a ko threat, or use as leverage for doing something nearby.
al> by descending instead of preventing the cut at A, white creates a weakness that puts both marked groups at risk, and it can be exploited by  black to reach out into the center, destroying white's potential territory there.
al> white's potential territory in the upper left corner is suddenly much smaller. To save as much as possible, white should answer at A instead of C16. NOw black can reach under the white stones further into the corner.
Aki [13k?]: this is tricky  al> white has to play at A to connect to  the white stones outside, or at B to make the second eye, in order to save the group.
al> A was the critical point.
al> W O15 is not necessary to protect from a black cut, since the X marked black group only has two liberties. By playing #82 at A instead, white would capture either the triangle marked group, or the square marked stone. In the latter case, even, the rest of black's stones at the top right would be in jeopardy.
al> Of course, a white cut at A is still severe. al> K18 is a wasted stone that does not accomplish anything useful for white, as it will immediately be captured, and even helping black extend to the left along the top into white's potential territory.
al> Black G3 is a mistake, as it removes one of the black group's liberties...
Aki [13k?]: I don't think I'm good enough to play you yet. Gwyel [-]: don't say that Gwyel [-]: the point is learning  al>...something that gives white the means to kill the black group even though it may look as if black has the upper hand.  al> The triangle marked black group has three liberties. The square marked white group appears to have only two, but it has, effectively, three (numbered in the diagram), in that black has to make an extra move to reach under at J1 or G1. So, white A forces black to play at B to stop white from escaping, and the follow up of white at C causes black to self-atari if he attempts to play at 3.
Aki [13k?]: damn...
Gwyel [-]: I should say " I don't think I'm good enough to play you yet." Aki [13k?]: How do you figure? You're in the lead as far as I can tell.
Gwyel [-]: you have 3 corners  al> in fact, white does not "have" any corner at this point. There is potential that may be secured by playing at A, B or C, but the only corner white has any kind of grip on is the lower right, which is worth about 10 points. If black plays any of these points first, however, it will cause serious harm to white in the corners.
Gwyel [-]: atm Aki [13k?]: I don't consider bottom right or top left mine yet Gwyel [-]: I guess I overplayed little bit..
Aki [13k?]: This is fun, if a bit nerver-racking.
Aki [13k?]: Sorry I'm taking so long Gwyel [-]: no worries
al>  Possibly, it would have been better to reach from the bottom, to N8, making use of the threat of capturing the white stones at P7 and P9.
al> black K10 would have been harder to cut.
Gwyel [-]: ooo man Gwyel [-]: this is not going well now Aki [13k?]: Sure you didn't do that on purpose? Aki [13k?]: Wait, what? Gwyel [-]: that ruined everything
>This opening by white known as "facing komoku". I find it hard to play against, so usually, I would play move 3 in the bottom left to prevent w from playing it.   > I also like to play it, so seeing as how w played D17, I'd probably play C4 to take a facing komoku opening myself.  >This is a lot of personal preference, though, and I can't say for sure that letting w take this opening was a mistake. I just know that I wouldn't do it as I have a hard time playing against it.
> This move is a deviation from the standard joseki. See the variation for the standard move a this point.
>The iron post is a good idea in response, keeping white separated. I'm not sure if it's the right move, but I couldn't say for sure that it's a bad one.
My first mistake , H5 or G3 would be much better  >Actually, playing 19 at D15 was the first mistake. See the variation there for details.
Should i play O2 before this move ?  >Yes. It doesn't cost you anything, and it makes the n4 group just a bit weaker.  >Other than that, though the sequence from move 37 through to here was quite well-played. You managed to turn a very nasty situation with a very weak group into a not-insignificant capture, sizable bottom territory and a decent wall. Well done.
2 useless moves  > not useless at all. This is actually a very good move.  See the variation at move 81.
I decided to give up the corner for influence on the middle , but it doesnt seem to be a good exchange
> b needs to come ahead in the endgame by pushing down on w's groups. This has become a centre-oriented game. A rough estimate shows the following:  W, top left: ~10 points      Top right: ~20 points      Left side: 8 points      Bottom left: ~10 points      Bottom right: ~ 5 points W, total: roughly 60 points, including captured stones and komi  B, top left: 5 points      Top: ~ 10 points       Right side: ~25 points       Bottom:  ~15 points. B, total: Roughly 50 points, including captures.   Note this does not include aji or influence.  So, the way things currently stand, b needs to eke out ten more points in the centre than w. How can this be done? look around: Where is there aji, and how can b use it? Two places pop out to me: Bottom left and top left. The bottom right has some aji, too, but it's not immediate. See the variation:
Should have played O18, that move costs me alot of points .  > This situation actually began to be troubled at move 129, so see the variation there for details.  The thing here is that this is a center oriented game. Whoever ekes out more in the centre will probably win.   B has more influence, but w is ahead in territory. In addition, w has three easy launching areas (the marked stones) to enter Black's area of influence and make very damaging reductions from. This is not an easy situation for black. In this situation, I would probably play n9 or something of the sort to try and get enough out of the side to have a shot at winning, but I think that, barring some great mistake, w has a won game at this point.
>This is such a mistake by w. In addition to being a wasted move (if b tries to capture, w has an extra liberty because of the k19 approach so the throw-in w was worried about doesn't work), the sequence it finishes off creates aji in the top left, which will come into play shortly.
>right idea, maybe sub-optimal approach.
>Again, right idea, but maybe not the most effective approach. The important thing, though, is that the idea is there. You know what you should be doing, and that's a very good thing. Refinement will come with time and experience.
I think this move is too slow , where should i play ? From this point, i know that i've made mistakes , but i dont know which one .  >See the variation on this move
blas [4k]: hi
> Black makes the yon-ren-sei, rapidly developing a large moyo. White must take energic action to limit Black's potential.
> No hit at GoBase. Why ?
> I think this was poor by Black. If afraid of W D10, he shouldn't start with the 1-2 exchange but probably play C10 directly.
P: I think that the variation is better, but I dont know what is the criteria to use in this situation. I think the variation is better because I reinforce the botton left.  > This is too soft, and indeed wrong direction.
P: Now I have to einforce with a not very good move. That's why I say that C14 was not good.  > Right, D2 is big but in this game the center is important.
P: I see no future in attacking c8. For me this is the best place to invade, but Im not sure  > I agree about C8. R6 is a good point, but here W should also consider attacking Q16 first.
> A slow move.
> Not urgent. W is floating without a clear base, and you might prefer R17 later.
> Slow again - little effect on W.
> Slow and a bit vague. There are more urgent moves.
P: Now I think it was not good because R6 group is weak, and I´ll create two weak groups  > Yes. This is a fundamental point in dealing with weak groups. It is ok to make a weak group, often you just have to. But then, settle your group as quickly as possible before you start anything else.  Otherwise, your opponent will enjoy himself setting up a splitting attack, or a driving attack, or a leaning attack.  To the contrary, if you settle quickly, you get more opportunities later because you're freed from the burden of having to care about the group.  So, when floating amidst a big moyo, we should muster our patience and make thick shape before we rush into open areas.
P: I'e manage to live, but R6 is weak and he wil have territory in the centre.  >Yes. But K7 is shy. B must put more pressure, since he has bad aji at R3.
> Slow move !
>Reaching out is less attractive now. O7 lost tempo.
> Painful.
>We can see A is beyond the sector line: too deep ! But W is behind now, has to try hard...
P: I ussually dont know if in this kind of situation is better to invade like that and try to make sabaki or try to reduce from outside  > Another fundamental.   To decide serenely, you have to make a positional judgement (count the game). A rough estimate will do if you're lazy or don't have much thinking time, but take the habit of pausing between each fight to assess the board. If ahead, you don't need to take risks. If behind, then you have to.  The latter is the case here, so your intuition didn't fail you this time... But in serious play, say a tournament, explicit positional judgement is a required skill. By the way top players are most admired for this, especially Yi ChangHo.
> Interesting play.
> A success for White.
> Heavy !
> Sente cut. But where is the profit ?
> "Please hit my nose in sente...", Blacks beg.
> You must have felt tremendous joy at this point !
>Of all moves... had it to be an empty triangle ? I am puzzled about this one, let's call it a byo-yomi blunder... ;-)
> Of course.
P: This is gote and I can reduce the center
> Yes, huge. This is the last commented move in this review.
after taking the corner maybe best to stat a moyo with q10 q10 is a critical point becuase is an extension both for black an white
Is this approach move ok?  By playing Q5, it seems that I'm making the marked stone quite useful later in the joseki.  black should have taken r10 but now q5 is ok
White makes a solid base, reduces my territory, and weakens my group, all in one move!
ok d9 is alright but the lower right is not settled yet
Maybe this was wrong... to push the white stone into my weaker area?  I thought I was obeying the principle, "extending from a shimari is more valuable than extending from a non-shimari"  m17maybe ok but then again what was your plan?to take the offensive c14 is a condidate for attack m17 is defensive in spirit trying to take territory at this point of the game sente is crucial  the s2 group is weak and a white move around d11 treatens d9 so maybe c12 is best to start a base an attack c 14 at the same time
How do I respond to this?
c7 i s too submissive. you got t fight the fights
there is little purpose for e3 only helps white
this sequence is suicidal for black. it creates 2 weak groups. First thing for black is connect or reduce
All my groups are becoming weak.  Not good...
black must get outside
Here I wanted to focus on gaining profit from white's weak group.  What's a clever way to do this?
Now it seems something will die.  I know part of the problem was that I made some mistakes in the top corner, but even still, I feel white gained control before I made those mistakes.
No way to get out and I'm down by 160 points.  black played defensive and never tryied to take the initiative
still a big move
still a big move
i like this move, because of the influence, but i'm not sure now is the ideal time to play it, because you have too many 4th line stones.
not very strong. Neither the corner nor the Q13 stone are really safer from that.
cross-cut is a very useful move to disturb your opponent in his territory. White knows this. At this point, you should play very carefully.
cross-cut is a very useful move to disturb your opponent in his territory. White knows this. At this point, you should play very carefully.
It was mandatory to protect there. you have lost mainly influence, so the outcome of the fight is not too bad.  This move seems a bit conservative to me. R8 or Q9 seem possible, and are mking much more work.
nice shape
nice shape
This is not the right move. R16 allows you to push white towards the side where you are stronger.   Letting white live there will cost you 40 points, so this is an huge fight.
This is not the right move. R16 allows you to push white towards the side where you are stronger.   Letting white live there will cost you 40 points, so this is an huge fight.
this stone is in a really bad place. A simple move in S18 from white will ensure him life, and death for you.  This is probably the worst mistake you made during those 36 first moves.
this move is totally a waste of time : your group is dead.  You have to learn to assess if your groups are alive are dead. With that move, you are simply throwing a stone in the dustbin.
white is right not to answer your last move.   At that point, White leads the game, because his territory is much stronger than yours.
very small move. There are still big points to take.
very small move. There are still big points to take.
white has clearly earned more than you from the last moves.   It may seem a bit harsh, but at that point, you should probably resign.
You have to learn the way to live in that situation, that will arise in so many games.
this move is very small, and white is right not to answer it directly
this move is very small, and white is right not to answer it directly
you cannot hope to win, you have to resign now.
Should I have filled in the ko?   Only if you were sure that you could kill his group, i.e. not.  Alway let your opponent connect, unless you're sure you can kill him, because a group fighting for his life can be very dangerous.
There is no point anymore in commenting the game, white has now at least a 100 points lead.
What is the best why to do 146-153?
Elessar has resigned the game. Did I resign too early? I'm not very good at counting.    no, you did not resign too early :) the game is over at that point (I mean, literally over, it's time to count points)  The right time to resign was from move 70
this is a tricky opening,so my follow up may be wrong  [kb]: Yes, this is a trick play.
Just play at A, it doesn't help your opponent.
after i sealed in i have to defend in gote  [kb]: Your play at B4 is suspect.
These stones are stronger than they look - it is probably better to play low or pincer here.
another tricky opening  [kb]: In this context it looks OK, especially since it helps White connect all his stones together.
[kb]: This exchange is not good for Black.
the pincer look too brave for me  [kb]: Agreed, but your response is incorrect.  "Make a fire in the east to attack in the west"
[kb]: This move is really suspect.  It hurts the heavy C10 stones at the left.
[kb]: This move is joseki, but probably a better response here would be the stand at E12.
i not sure about this move  [kb]: I am not familiar with this joseki much either, but it seems too risky.  Still, Black could get an acceptable result.
[kb]: White let you off the hook.
now i got 2 groups to settled while white 1, so i think i am in trouble.
[kb]: Solid, but too soft.  White can give up the H15 stone.
lucky? i get to connect both of my groups  [kb]: Yes.  But White can still push up at E10 to create weaknesses.
[kb]: Black is ahead in this game now.  White has little to do with his influence.
[kb]: This is really a direction of play issue.  You must try and reduce the center of the board.
very solid move, now white influence toward centre is very good.
i think this is wrong? since i still got 1 unsettled group on the left.  [kb]: This move looks good.  It looks hard to kill the group on the left - it is too big.
[kb]: Good double attack by White.
for me this is a very greedy move  [kb]: It is the right direction - but must be at S2
mistake, should be at s6  [kb]: no, S6 runs into the same problem.
This is bad for White.  Now he is really behind, and must kill something.
Gote
this will be a difficult run toward the centre  [kb]: At least you get to play first now, you have a chance of making everything live.
this move is too shiny, aiming at both of my group
i settled i group, but the other one look too difficult
lucky? i found the answer  [kb]: Yes, now you have won.
another aggressive move
white gain nothing in the centre, from here on i was sure i can win this game. but my concern is whether my game plan is correct? since it is too risky and my opponent  could have slice off my head.  [kb]: It is better to reduce your opponent's influence than play the way you did.  Against a huge wall, you cannot let your opponent have overwhelming influence in the center.  However, you played a good game.  End of comments.
taresan has resigned the game.
too slow for white , i like o 16
too slow and it helps white to connect
whits made a mistake
here is too slow , white can threat your stone at the other side
its better to play moves faster like
slow
block 3-3 position
c 18 is not a good move, it can be attack later
it was attacked as shown
it was  threaten
bad move
white can still extend
too small ignore it play
RyuOko [?]: haha
its useless
?? self atari
randyg [16k]: desperation setting in I guess!
RyuOko [?]: just about it i believe
randyg [16k]: I think it was it a while ago for me ! :(
Perhaps A would be better? I didn't play it since white could play at B and then build a large base. Your thoughts?   FM: I think beginning some fight here is possible, though this place is strange as after white B, which is natural, it has no good attacking power on the P16 stone.
H
FM: The corner is not really important now, when the board is empty and especially when having stone like L17 it is better so build power instead of points.
FM: interesting idea, though it feels like forcing white to attack the middle stone.
Too agressive, or not I just not play optimally afterwards?  FM: interesting variation! I would not think about it before.  It seems to be better than just connecting at Q17.
FM: good and calm move
FM: although white shape looks nice, the aji if A and B makes it a fair position.
A is better.  FM: This is the fighting style: of course your opponent will think about  B when you play like this. You just have to have some plan prepared for that case.
FM: this move is extra frequent in handicap games. Now there are three basic responses: A or B, C or D and E.  A and B seems to be bad in this position as the upper white group is quite ok and can make shape with J15 or L18  The choice is between C-D and E.
FM:This move is too far and makes it possible for white to make good shape.
FM: this result is good for white
I wanted to play at A, but would that be premature?  FM: A really looks very nice
FM: I dont know if this move is the best on the board, but I have a nice feeling about it.
FM: This move is very bad. White wanted to get the Q19 move for himself, but gives up the O15 atari, which is much more important.
FM: Big and safe point.
FM: this side is not iinteresting for black now.
Mistake, should be at A or B.  FM: just C is also playable now.
FM: this move looks to be a little tesuji, but loses one liberty and lowers the power of black shape a lot.
FM: This move secures some territory, but also forces white to protect his weakness.
Would playing atari the other way be better?  FM: There are many many variations and the decising about this move is just the moment when players spent 20 minutes of their thinking time on a tournament. I have added some for inspiration. This move looks a bit strange as it forces white to attack the right stones, but probably is possible.
FM: this move makes very bad shape.
Should be at A, right?
Bad ko threat.  FM: white could capture with A anyway.
Here, I lost on time. Please help me learn what I did wrong and tell me if my analysis was wrong. Thanks so much for reviewing this!   FM: I hope my comments will help you and that I didnt make any mistake in the variations. This is my first review on GTL so please let me know your opinion about it :) Thank you, Field Mouse
I usually start attack right away and invade the corner. However, the follow moves I don't have any solution.  >>> Are you black? This move is much better than the immediate invasion on the 3-3-point. The 3-3-point invasion takes a relatively small corner and gives lots of outside strength to the opponent. In the beginning this is not a good deal. Later on it might be.
>>> White 8 is unusual. C14 or D14 is more common (and probably better)
>>>I would have played J16. The distance is too large and therefore the pair of black stone has a vulnerable gap.
I don't know how to response to this G17.  >>>> so you are black. G16 (as you played) is probably the best.
Personally, I think I respond wrongly, I should play C17 to invade corner instead.  Could you please give me some possible response to this?  >>> this move is fine.
>>> W12 looks wrong.
I think this should play at F16, so I may have A or B to attack.  Am I right? Or I have other better play?  >>> B is a suitable attacking point only after you made an approach move at C14. A is not an attack. B13 is good as it protects against W E17.
For this, I regreted that I played E16, I missed that chance to attack the corner. And those three stones were in danger.   >>> I think black is doing fine
I just have problem deciding playing this move or going outward.  However, I played this move. What I think now is not very efficient!  Does it has any other move?  >>>> there is no other move. F18 is a must. If you go outside white will connect.
Now Black(9) is in danger!  How can I prevent this?  How can I reduce the harmful effect for this?  >>>> black should not defend K16. The black weak group (F16 etc.) is much more urgent.
>>>> B29 drives White against black's weak group. Bad for black. H14 is vital for both sides. (see variations)
>>> not a good move
>>>> black must not leave his group F16 so weak!
>>>> good move
Same move! And I don't have solution.  >>> your answer is fine.
>>>> I think this is reasonable play from black. You should think about ..... (see variation)
Am I play wrong? Should I play D9 directly?  >>>> It looks like D9 is forced. However it is not. You can punish White for this move....
>>>> bad move
>>>> too late. Thie works only without W D13.
>>>> see variation
>>>> unnecessary
>>>> I prefer the other way round
>>>> ??? to far from white stones to attack
>>>> right
>>>> very good
I think this was bad move!
I think following was wrong direction. I should play Q13, but I think that also not very efficient.
>>>> you lost a lot in this sequence. R14 was to much resistance.
I am just to careless.
>>>> you cannot win this any more
Overall, in this game, I was just to careless. Moreover, I don't know how to response to some moves.  So would you please give me some solution.  Thank you very much.  >>>> I think you played pretty well the first 2/3 of the game.
[Frank] You did not follow joseki here.  See variation.
Is b O6 the best?  [Frank] I think it is not bad, but there are still many large points on the board and since both marked groups are alive, maybe o6 is not as urgent.  As an alternative, you might kakari or play a star point.
How to treat this invasion?  [Frank] How about forcing W to live small and in gote in the corner?  You consider using your strength outside for fighting.
What is the biggest threat?  [Frank] Maybe you should just take the influence.
Could black kill white?  [Frank] Yes, I think so.  See move 63.
[Frank] What is your plan here? You are giving W territory.  You should always have a plan.  One way to play is to work hard at maintaining your outside influence.  See mv 73.
[Frank] No reason to keep pushing.  Allowing N11 is quite painful.
Is here a more agressive play better?  [Frank] This is fine, not much you can do
Was this bad already? It was not good in the end.
Is there a better solution somewhere here?  [Frank] See previous notes.
Can b kill w?
Could I avoid the ko with better play?  [Frank] The mistake was much earlier.
Can black escape?  [Frank] Looks hard.
************ This is a little odd, though I am already not familiar with this Joseki (if it is Joseki). Playing at A is typical in the Joseki I know.
I dont know of this was a good exchange for white/both.  ******************** Looks even to me. I think P5 is big for either player now.
*************** Letting White play F17 is bad for Black. White gets a lot of thickness. Black gets little territory.
*********** see variation
Dont know of this was a good exchange for white.  *************** This was much better for black. Despite the corner stone being outnumbered 3:1 black kept the corner and ended up with about the same territory as white, even perhaps more and more solidly.
*****************  I think this attack is good  Black looks like he went a little too far. it might be a little early though - white might consider extending from the marked stones first.
This was missclick. C8 was where I wanted to play.  ************** See variation.
******************* This is an overplay. Black should not be able to do well here.
**************** This is a bad mistake on White's part. See variation.
******************** White is now way behind
************************* This move is a mistake as black showed in the game. See variation.
************************ Overall, white fell behind when black connected underneath at B15.  White's mistake in dealing with black's attack at the top was loosing for white.  White's loss on the right was preventable, but there was no way for him to catch up at this point.  I have shown how all of these errors could have been avoided. I hope this is helpful.  Thanks, Dave
TheBeast [10k]: olloloo
Atsushi [7k]: GJ TheBeast [10k]: agree
I thought I'd start the game off by being agressive, 7.5 komi felt like so much and I decided early to play agressively and fight hard for territory.  Was this Kakari too early or premature?  I didn't want him to take any free points, and a kakari on the bottom left felt slow to me for some reason.  * I don't see a problem with this kakari.  It really depends on your style of play.  A wedge around c10 or completing your shimari are also perfectly reasonable plays.
I didn't really know anything about this move so I just took it in stride and make a 2 point jump, is there a better response?  * This move is Shuusaku's kosumi.  It's a strong move and keeps you from pressing white down.  A and B are both fine responses.  You should avoid the temptation to continue by attacking from the other side, as white will pincer and you'll have two weak groups to take care of.  I'll go ahead and show you some joseki for each. (See variations)
* This avoids some potential complications with the keima at d13.  White's main follow-ups are at A and B.
* This was a bit unreasonable, black should end up with a good result.
* This move is a bit slow, leaving white to take his extension.
* This was a bit oversealous perhaps.  I prefer k17 or an approach at o17 in this position.
Since my two stones on top were facing this way, I just made a light extension.  Should I have tried to keep the initiative by attacking his lower left stone, or was this move fine?  Would the 4th line have been better?  * This wasn't a bad move by any means.  You do, however, have a LOT of low stones at this point.  Perhaps you should have played elsewhere for the time being.  I like e4 for this position.
I  didnt want him to have territory hwere (as it is quite large) so I did the kakari knowing it would be an uphill fight.  Should I have just made a large knights move from my lower right stone, or was this ok?  * I don't like this move right now.  I think that white is far too thin for you to worry about it being solid territory, and you have some better moves (such as A or B) which do give you very solid territory.  What's more, A works well with your R10 stone to build a right side moyo.
* I don't like this choice because it makes things far too easy for black.
* This move is too slow.  Better to play at A (see variation)
Could I have been more agressive here?  I just decided to play safe and make two living groups instead of trying to kill his.  * This is exactly where I would have played.  You have a solid corner and W won't make a base.  You should profit from chasing this weak stone.
* This was too lax.  White got a good result.
* Better to punish white at s14 (see variation).  What's more, this is more of an endgame play.  Since black isn't worried about living on the side, this move's purpose can only be reduction.  It's just too early to play this.
* Black has a follow-up at A later on.
* Better to play at A (See variation).  This is, however, very much an endgame move.  B should be playing more actively, making some influence in the center.
* White finally closes the door for retaliation at s14
odnihs [9k]: this is getting to be a pain
ForDreaM [12k]: what do you mean?
odnihs [9k]: im playing like crap right now
ForDreaM [12k]: we all have off games just try to enjoy it ^^ odnihs [9k]: hehe
ForDreaM [12k]: you cant really sit there and talk like you're playing THAT badly anyway ForDreaM [12k]: its not like you lost a 20 stone group ForDreaM [12k]: ;d odnihs [9k]: xD  * This was a good time to take sente.  There are big moves at A and B.
* This was okay as well, but W will easily start building territory along the upper-left now.
I saw this huge territroy forming, and i decided I had to stop it from happening or I'd lose for sure.  So I made this soft invasion, feeling I could run away alright.  Is this move bad, or could I invade better in some way?  Also, vs a stronger player, would this move not be able to connect?  * This was a fine move.  Black has more than enough space to run
* This was an overplay.  Whie should not have invited Black into his territory.
* This was too passive, preventing a 1 point reduction, and giving white sente.
* This was too passive, giving black sente back
* This could have been better (see variation).  This is the last comment.
From this point in the game onward Im in :20 SD in byo-yomi so I was moving very rapidly, so there may be some small things I missed. ;[
I actually don't know any pincer joseki, or any joseki at all, so I'm not sure if this is correct. If I played the joseki I do know, I feel black would get too nice of a position (see branch).  A: I think this pincer is not often played at such an early stage.  Note the black stone in the lower right corner. I don't think it would be easy for white to be succesful playing in an agressive way on the lower side.
A: I don't know how to answer best this move.
I really don't know what to play in this situation, but feel that splitting his groups is really the only option.   A: black 7 made white 6 stronger. Bk4 seems out of place.
A: I think this move is a bit empty
This move seems bad, but I wanted to secure this group before attacking the g5 stones, which seem weak to me.   A: g5 group has a strong shape now. They have one eye already. Wc4 is alone though and an easy target for black to attack once he gets sente back. For this reason, I think w14 was'nt good.
A:black should capture
A: I think this was good timing for white. By playing at A, there is still room for black to create one eye on the 4th line. So black has a strong shape.
A: there is a tesuji for white,
I think maybe I shouldn't have played so loosely.
I'm not 100% sure, but I don't think I can kill this anymore, so I settle for sealing in and thickness. I think I profited greatly over all from this opening.   A: yes, I think W was very successful thanks to black's overdensive and slow plays.
A: could black have play tenuki here?
A: this move only helps white.
I want to play something over here to make use of my thickness in conjunction with my D15 stone. This might have been too close to my thickness though.   A: this move seems big enough to me.
A: I think this move is very big, but N6 looks bigger to me. It protects against the cut at H8 and threatens to create a gigantic moyo.
A: I think white can capture the stone. B61 is too close to white's thickness.
A: good timing for the cut
A: there is a saying, ... if you cannot capture, better don't atari..
The following exchange seems bad for me. I think I should have played something light here to get out.
A: the atari didnt work and now the cut is getting painful for W.
I became scared for this group, and let myself get sealed in in order to make sure it lived. If I continued to push at N8, black profits too much. This group should be able to live, so I tenuki.
I don't see the low & high combination pincer in my joseki dictionary, so I suppose this is technically wrong. However, I don't necessarily see how this could end poorly for me unless one of the two stones dies.  Black looks weaker than me here, so I should be able to make use of forcing moves, there's plenty of room to live on the right and I can run to my own stones on the left.   A: W could have also considered jumping out splitting the black group in the center.
A: 85 to 89 are all bad for black. They push the cart from behind.. W can be very happy now because he won points thanks to blacks effort.
After this, black really doesn't have any points. As such, I have to believe that all my major mistakes occured after this.   A: I would have answered W98 more strongly.
This move may have been unnecessary. Had I played elsewhere, the game might have been a rout.
Here, again, I think I can tenuki. This is now effectively two handicap stones I provided my opponent.
I've known for some time that, for black, this 9 times out of 10, the wrong response. I imagine it is in this situation too, but I have no idea how to properly punish.
A: I think this was a mistake for white
A: the peep strengthend black's group in the side.
I'm not sure how to keep the top right group alive now, I just take profit to the left and assume I'm still ahead.
Simple over play, too greedy.
A: black lost some points here
A: I think W has a better answer than this.
A: I think black lost some points again.
I don't know if this is supposed to work or not. If it is, black made a mistake some where.
A: it is very bad to fill one's own liberty in a capturing race. W should have simply captured and the trouble is gone.
I mis-read the fact that black can now connect underneath and tenuki'd.
A: black missed one point again.
A: black missed another two points again, plus the sente moves below.
A: this is dame. Black missed another pair of points
A: i dont understand why black played here.
A: black lost again here.
here i try to be agresive thinking that either way the fight goes i`ll get outside influence towards one of my corners adn probably get sente to play the remainning empty corner
this caught me off guard i was expecting R5 or P5 (joseki which i sort of know) or ..at forse a pincer but this :-?? suggestions?  K: a light move is good, or setup to take the bottom, see Variation
should i respond  or continuea the atack on the lower corrner
here i`ve figured that he tryes for a side teritory on the left  so i`ve played C5 thinking he will go D6 and i`ll try to reduce that sometime later
this i think is a mistake form him.. so i try to take advantege
wass it enough? should i`ve continued the pusshing in the left ?
this i belive it was small what other points should i`ve played
K: W is alive, this seems slow
well he preaty much give away the bottom ..so i`ve took it :D  K: you might not have the bottom, see variation.
now this muve gave me the idea to try for a teritory in the upper side also
so first pincer ..then bulid influence towards the upper side ..while atacking
not since he did not invade ..time to rescue my lone stone ( was that the corect play ?)
ive figured that a ko was not so bad at a time so i`ve took another big point (or so i think) was there smt white might do .. tu hurt my right side group ?
K: nice on right for B and now profit with L6, good job
now this is neither reduction nor invasion .. so.. L15 seemd like an allright response
...and now .. this confused me ?? how to respond ..it seems week but .. i did got intro trouble there
this is a miss clik ..i was thinking at J15
strange he seems to me that he is playing teribly  ...  K: W is making life and taking B territory, very nice invasion, for W.
K: this makes W stronger
smoe sugestions how should i`ve handeld that ?
sweet life in the corner .... right?
so he invaded me ..time to return the favor ?? is the timmng allright .. could i`ve done more  in the upper side.. or could i`ve done something else all togheter ?
played this to defend the M10 cutand gain something in the center  K: this does not help B
and again playing towards the center
K: this move makes W stronger
hmm not very  good result for black ..K8 would be a big point for me
at this momment i did a quick count  (and read) i come up with this ...  the bottom is mine a damn huge bottom in my opinion and whites corner is open on 2 sides so i can reduce it further right side ..decent group upper side ... can live if ataked with the L14 and J15 eyes plus concetions to the upper right corner and some eye space arround G13  white looks small on the right side ...and his leftside teritory is under heavy atack .. so  2 alternatives ..continue atacking on the left side... or try to reduce the right side ... right side seemd easyer so..here it goes...
trying to connect to the upper corrner
somewhat shaky ... can i be atacked ?
now ..this seems overplay ....
is this good? trying to protect as much as i can
D5 or B3 ? ..
safeest..giving up B4
...he get to play on both sides of the corrner first :( sugestions to avoid that :-s ?  K: See variation @ move 144
now it seems that i have the initiative and that white group with a bulky five  eye gave me a wild idea  that is to kill it .... i`ve figured out that i vas strong enough on the left to try and if i keep him cut i can do it ... in the end i fail miserably loosing the game (if it weren`t for his later mistakes)  now my question is..can it be done ?... and how  should i`ve tryed ataking his upper left group in order to bulid osme strnaght and then atack the P13 group ? if that`s the answer ..how to do it  or is it better to just keep reducing the left and aim for a bigger teritory in the center (am i far enough ahead to be doing just that ?
now.... what to do .. can i still make life for the F11 group ? or should give up the chase allready
his seems a mistake... now can thee be life ? for me?
rescued those stones :-s ..little importance now :(
..stuborn whit ..is he seeing smt i don`t ?  K: W just wants to win the capturing race, W is defensive here.
seemd teribly necesary to me ..right or wrong ?  K: correct
no this ... .. is it overplay or does my  teritory looks so week ?
now whit i belive is just plain stuborn
another ... thankyou move.. time to reduce
so far i got what i aimed for
now this is the end .. i win the upper side ... and the game ..with no merrit whatso ever ..so please if u can make some conclusion  i`d be gratefull :)
xiaorong [10k]: hi gg
Is this a bad move?  I wanted to enclose my corner, but perhaps moving out along the top of the board was better play.  Playing here seems small, considering that afterwards black sketches out some huge territory with B10. [m]: bC13 does not put much pressure on the corner, so you can tennuki, and play one of the big points on the board. Making shimari on the TR seems to be a good idea, or an aproaching move at R6. Note that B10 would be a wrong move: it is wrong idea to play such a low move in the very opening of the game.
I feel behind in this fuseki, possibly because of C15, so I decided that I'm going to spoil Black's framework as best I can.  Is this an overplay, considering I cannot extend to C9 without touching a Black stone? [m]: it is not an overplay, "just" it is not the right direction, b's framework is very thin at the moment, no need to spoil it.
[m]: I think this is wrong move: when you make contact moves, you strengthen the touched stones. Contact plays are for defense, but should be used only in emergencies, and that's not the case.
[m]: good, but maybe first you should push once at E9, not to be shut in.
[m]: okay, let's take a look on the table. You played 11 stones, and 10 of them are on the third line, or even lower. Playing so low is "safe", but your development is very slow. Especially, this move is to close to your shimari, so it is very unefficient.
[m]: ...an another stone at the 3rd line..
[m]: an another, even lower.
[m]. ... and an another. Don't expect to win with such low moves.
With this reducer, I feel I have caught up. [m]: this is not a reducing move but an invading one: a reducing one would be somewhere on the imaginary boundary of the b's moyo, somewhere near the line between D7-Q8.
[m]: B was very kind to you.
[m]: good idea.
[m]: the proverb says: "don't touch what you are attacking". A capping play (K8) is still a good move for b.
Too small... I know there are bigger points on the board, but where? [m]: yes, it is slow, just a few points.
[m]: good.
Probably too slow again? [m]: this move does nothing: because of O12 the wall you're making is without meaning.
[m]: good, if you can live with it. (but you couldn't).
[m]: monkey jump
[m]: good. now you're thick. but maybe first you can push at E11.
[m]: what the purpose of this move?
Now the lightbulb goes off... I have a -huge- wall facing the center of the board, and Black plays at Tengen, trying to reduce my territory and spoil the game.  Do I go right away for a kill, or do I try to strategically chase him away while making territory?  I played at K12 with bloodlust in mind.  [m]: that's why making territory in center is hard: K10 has a lot of direcions to run out, it is hard (or impossible) to kill it. But it's a good target to attack. If you attack, try to profit from attacking even if you don't kill the target.
[m]: K10 can be still connected with Q8, so your moves have meaning just if you make them to attack the upper black stones. But they are not an easy target neigther..
Already faltering, now my territory on the right side is severely weakened, and I seem a little too thin to catch black.  I'm worried that Black is going to live through all of this and ruin all my influence (which actually happened in the game) [m]: as I told, killing K10 is hard, so try try to make an exchange.
[m]: good
[m]: you are too weak on the right to attack now, and K12, M12 are thin also.
[m]: now, b is out, and, most important, he damaged your right a lot.
[m]: it doesn't work, as b showed it.
Great... Black has totally demolished his way into my influenced and spoiled nearly everything!!  What happened?  [m]: you tried to kill something not for killing. The killing failed, and (!) you gained almost nothing during this fight.  Trying to save some points in the middle doesn't look a very good idea, take a look at the another possibilities.
[m]: ?
[m]: now all the stones are living, the yose started already.  B15, B3, B9 are the biggest moves.
Here is where Black beings to pull ahead by playing bigger points and not giving up sente.  Supposing White had sente instead of Black A17, what moves should White be looking at?
[m] small, just one point.
Bad gote play... [m]: yes, b3 is bigger, and double sente.
[m] small too.
[m]: nice!
janr: A or B are more common.
janr: on the right side, there remains some space for a white invasion (i.e. white can make a base easily) I would prefer A or B  to protect the right side better.  C is also a good point of course
janr: Black has to spend another move to avoid that white makes a base. I would prefer the more aggressive move at A (black is strong)
Is p4 better ?  janr: I would consider p5 to split the stones without making them stronger. The game move is ok too as it splits the stones.
janr: I think it is more urgent to play A to avoid that white gets sufficient eye shape.
janr: I think this move makes white stronger.  I would play A or B to enlarge to moyo and let white the task to reduce it or comming out further
janr: usually white plays A (see variation)
It would now be very slow for white to play the endgame move at A. Compare the difference in endgame when black does not play here: white's sente is a lot smaller.
As I said, this is very slow. White should play A or B (or around C)
An endgame move
a huge mistake.    i should have played at o9  janr: This move is an endgame move. I would enlarge the moyo at A.
janr: this is a mistake. Black can not save the stone at a low price. It is better to enlarge to moyo
White can capture some stones.
janr: First make the atari at A
janr: having A exchanged for B is a plus for black Now, the sequence A, C, D is sente for white, as black should defend against white E (atari), F, G
janr: Black should try to use his influence.  The 3-3 invasion makes white strong.  White's wall will neutralize a lot of blacks influence.
janr: usually, white plays A or B
janr: Black got a large corner
janr: I don't like the invasion very much as white can run into black's moyo while attacking this stone.
g10 better ?
janr: a large move.  But it is not sente.
I think it's larger to play in the lower left corner,
Now white can play first in this area
i didn't know how to handle this move janr: it is very hard for black to connect now that white got so strong above.
janr: I would play a more solid move (e.g. A) and invade the corner after white prevents the connection.
janr: black has too many cutting points.
janr: Black could connect at A.
janr: Connecting at A is sente
I resigned here    ninecrane [2d]: thx
Alopias [19k]: have fun  F: Aggressive start!  General flow of the game is usually Corners, Sides, Centre, as the corners are the easiest place to secure territory (and the centre the most difficult place).
JayG136 [17k?]: gl hf  This is not in the joseki library, so I did not know how to respond. I know that him attaching to me is supposed to make me stronger but how exactly should this play out? What are my options?  F: I'd probably hane at H4 and hope to build a large moyo on the right (see variation)
F: Sometimes it is best to let the opponent have what they want, whilst you take something more valuable elsewhere, hence why I'd hane and try to build up a big moyo in the corner.
Am I forced to fill here?  F: Not really - there are other options.  Don't be afraid to sacrifice a stone or two or three every so often in exchange for something big - you'll find your opponent will be hungry to eat them whilst you're happily winning the game elsewhere... (see variation)
Is the exchange in the bottom settled enough for my opponent to play this?  F: Cutting point remains at E5, and a fairly big territory grab at C4, but putting a stone near an empty corner is a very big move
F: Better to play D17 I think, as you can make two eyes in the corner quite easily. Better still to play in the bottom right corner and pressure this position later!  Corners should be where your first moves are, as you can roughly secure many points in just one or two moves - then move onto sides...
once again he attaches, but whats the best way to respond?
figured taking liberties away would be best, but i feel week doing this.  F: It's not so bad, but I'm not really sure - bigger territorial moves make it easier to see how you should approach the smaller battles.  You should play urgent moves before big moves, and by constantly attacking you are creating a lot of urgent moves for yourself, without securing much territory....
F: This is good for black, though ideally a space lower as the top wall is thicker.
too small? I thought it was sente because of the cut possibliity but my thought now is that my oppent should have ignored this move. Does a pincer work when there's a wall there?  F: Looks quite small unless you can surprise him in a battle using the E5 cutting point.  Helps black to create a solid wall, making any possible invasion much harder.  Once again, you can save these moves for later, don't rush them.
I messed up this sequence
F: Finally!
F: Best you can hope for here is to keep him small in the corner & to get influence down a side.  I'd suggest the right hand side in order to keep a door open to the centre, and counter the influence of the black top right corner stone.
This move really through me off, I thought I was finally building influence but now it feels like its all gone  F: Yeah that looks annoying, but you can pressure the group below now, and then you can pincer that stone and either capture it or take a chunk of territory the other side of it. Could be worth simply separating it from the group below & pincering it immediately.
F: Good play to kill this group
F: Not necessary to try seal him in like this - N3 is better to protect the cutting point and keep sente should he try to escape.  Patience is key.
F: Probably better to play out the ladder for a few moves here, even though B would win it in the end - would help to create influence facing the weak black stone and securing your territory at the bottom (see variation)  This way you're helping him build a solid wall cutting off your right hand side group to the centre.
This was pointless right? It my understanding is that he must come up with the ko threat, but just for practice, what ko threats do I have?  F: That's right.  Can't see many obvious KO threats - E7 or E6 to pull out those stones perhaps, but they would struggle to escape if B uses his thickness well.  D14 with a C13 follow up would be big too.
well I killed the group but look at that wall I let him make! Was it worth it?  F: Hard to say - certainly damaging if he manages to use his wall well, but at the moment he doesn't really have any surefire territory, compared to your three corners.
waay to small right?
but my opponent is generous
F: Left a small defect at B2
once again my oppent attaches, which this time perhaps is correct?  F: I doubt it is correct, perhaps a lateral extension rather than hane would be appropriate here to keep things simple.
not sure which direction was best, I just wanted to take a stab that the center, my guess is my original mistake was allowing him to have so much influence.  F:  To settle this group you'll have to play around Q9 in a few moves, which seems way too close to his thickness, so leaving an option to escape to the centre could be wise.
now I feel the pressure of the bottom walls,  I feel like a good opponent should be able to  kill this group, what should I have done differently?  F: Not easy to kill your group, as it has three options; settle with a move around Q9 or R15, or xtend with L10 to join up with either the weak D6 group or strong N4.  Look at the bright side - it helps to negate black's thickness on the bottom.
F: There goes one option - till not urgent to use another one as you can play as a reaction to his pressure still, if there are bigger points elsewhere on the board. Some interesting variations from this position.
my hope was to turn to the center, but this just led to another wall.  F: Good sense of direction of play, to reduce black's moyo, but the approach is gentle and helps black to secure big territory on the left.  I'd prefer a one space jump to open up some potential cuts, and making use of the cut at N13. (see variation)
F: Again, worth a risky play to mix things up
once again I let him build a wall.  F: See earlier variation - a bit of sacrificing and mixing things up could've prevented this, it looks quite hard to break inside now. Most of the time if you wish to gain something, you must give something in return.
F: Knights move - cuttable.  With the potential cut at D5 too, this could add up to something.
this does not seem to accomplish anything, I feel lucky that I was able to connect
this move felt bigger, is it?  F: I think so.  Take a step back and see where the completely undecided areas of the board are though... taking the initiative in those areas is worth more than the ~10 points at the bottom.
too small again?  F: Yep.  Sacrifice and global perspective...
F: Ouch.
I think I only helped him here
F: One space jump would work well here too - J11
F: After these last moves invading the centre you should feel confident about our position, so can afford to play more conservatively in the rest of the board.  Re-evaluate the weaknesses in your groups (not many), and the biggest territorial areas just waiting for someone to secure.  Once you secure the territories in question then you can continue wreaking havoc with your invasion.
F: A good time to switch, though if black ignores you and plays G9, it's a very tight game, so you'd have to make the most of this move with a follow up.
my oppoent seemed content to let me have the outside, but I felt like he should have fought for the corner  F: Yes, though he is doing a good job in securing most of the walls of his moyo.  Your play here is quite solid.
JayG136 [17k?]: hello?
JayG136 [17k?]: where'd you go
Alopias [19k]: seems i lost connection
Alopias [19k]: sorry, didnt realize,  F: Small - both your groups are safe, and invasion into his looks impossible & uneccesary. See variation from the last move which illustrates how you can make use of your good position to solidly continue invading and reducing your opponents territory.  The game is pretty even at this point, so choosing the moves which benefit you the most is important here.
Alopias [19k]: because your time seemed to 0
I thought maybe I could kill
JayG136 [17k?]: i have to go
I'm very bad at counting, I felt like i should have lost this game.  F:  I find corners and sides always score more than I think, so after looking at the top and the bottom and then the big invasion of the centre moyo (which was the clinching factor) I'd guess you'd be ahead. His territory around P7 could've easily been much reduced by playing there first.
Alopias [19k]: noboddy yet
F: I'd keep pushing through with E13 before making this move, not much difference though.
F: This move is not actually worth any points... the marked moves are though (in order).
F: Not necessary - E13 is 3 points in gote.
F: Curses
JayG136 [17k?]: pass?
ff - A little unusual.  The two-space pincer is much more common.  This pincer is a little loose, especially when it is backed up by the shimari in the upper right.  It is quite possible that White will play elsewhere rather than answer this.
ff - This play is clearly an overplay when Black is strong in the upper right.  It is sometimes seen when the upper right is held by White.  Here it creates two weak stones.  White is still outnumbered 4 to 2 on the upper side.  Black wants to keep the stones securely separated.
ff - This feels like Black is playing from the wrong direction.  The upper right is already strong.
ff - If White is going to play here, why play at L17 first?
ff - These days this is less common than it used to be.  Some pros consider it a mistake in order because it weakens the D13 stone and allows Black to play more aggressively in the corner.  Black answers correctly here...
ff - The earlier exchange of F14 for E13 makes this possible as we will see later.
ff - Normally in the upper left White will finish with F16.  This may not be strictly necessary since Black's pincer is further away than in the normal joseki.  However, L15 is too optimistic.  White is unable to threaten the J16 stone and the upper right is very solid.  These two White stones have no real prospects.  Black should be able to just play naturally and achieve a comfortable position.
ff - This series of plays by White is very advantageous for Black.  A single play at G17 would have been interesting here, I think.
ff - Black should be very happy here.  Black's wall is sticking out higher than White's two stones so Black waits for the chance to cap White.  Meanwhile Black has the connection underneath at L18 or can cut the White stones at L16.  Meanwhile the White position on the left still has defects in despite playing three times here.
ff - This is the normal play when Black has descended at B16 instead of connecting at C15.  However, when Black has played E16 already, the White stones are not strong and Black can not be closed in.  Therefore Black chooses B16 after F14 and E13 have been exchanged.
ff - Now Black must end up with some bad shape here.  This hane helps White's stones on the side no matter what happens.  It is better for Black not to allow this play.
ff - Black has played two stones that strongly connect the two groups.  However, these plays are fairly slow.  There is the risk that Black will not get enough value for these stones.
ff - A remarkably optimistic response. :-)  Can this work?
ff - Similarly, if White connects what will Black do?
ff - This seems too defensive.  Black is very strong here, especially after playing F13 and H14.  Cutting off one stone at L17 would be a disappointing result...
ff - If Black simply plays L16, does White have any hope to live here?
ff - There is a question whether Black should play from the other side at O3.  The upper right is too strong for Black to really want to try to build territory in front of it.
ff - This is from the wrong side.  White has no threat in the corner except to reduce Black's territory by a couple of points...
ff - Black can not expect White to passively answer this at R3.  See the variation...
ff - This looks like the wrong direction.  The right side is smaller than the center and bottom side, which are still quite empty.  The hane on top looks like the most reasonable play here.  See the variation...
ff - Black ends up in a very low position.  Luckily White makes a mistake in direction on the next play.  Note that Black has created a good chance for White by playing under the R7 stone instead of on top.
ff - This is small.  White should have played on the bottom side.
Black seizes the chance offered by White.
ff - Black plays next to a strong White wall.
ff - Black gets lucky when White plays on the left side.  White should have attacked the two stones in order to build up a wall before playing on the left...
ff - Is this an effective ko threat?  What happens if White ignores it?
ff - Seems like an overplay, Black does not retreat from the challenge...
ff - If White has to retreat like this, what was the point of J11?
Is that move a mistake?  ff - Where are there weak stones remaining on the board?  For Black the stones coming out of the left side do not clearly have two eyes yet.  Also the two stones on the bottom side do not have two eyes.  For White the stones running out from the left side are not securely connected to the live group at the top.  Are the upper right stones in any danger? No, they are clearly safe.  The answer is yes, this is a mistake. Consider the variations...
In the following fight black manages to get / keep a nice lead. however I am not sure if w missed something in the struggel of the next moves.  ff - Two points: Black starts with the advantage here and I don't think that Black does that well.  At the end of the sequence here it is not clear that Black is ahead!  In addition, I think that White possibly missed the strongest continuation right here at the beginning...
ff - White struggles here, this play does not really do anything...
ff - Good reaction by Black
ff - very aggressive
ff - Very interesting position with both sides suffering from shortage of liberties...
ff - Note that Black has 'forced' White to capture the two stones on the left.  This offsets the capture of the two White stones on the bottom by Black...
ff - In my opinion this is a major error by White that immediately loses the game.  See the variation...
I think the game is won for black here.  ff - I agree, but Black needs to think carefully about why.  Is Black really winning or is it mainly that White is losing? :-)
not sure if this is a good approach  *I think it's ok.
any better moves for white than this?  * Black S16 looks bad. S17 is the correct response.
H4 better for white?  * Yes, H4 is better to put G3 under pressure. Attaching to a wek stone strengthens it.
* I think White should play F3 or E2 to keep Black's groups separated.
Maybe too small  * I agree. White is fully alive and needn't answer. The top is not black territory, so this is too small.
this h17 seems bad, what would be a better move for white?  * A move at A would be good to build a big moyo and destroy Black's hopes for a moyo after P17. But i don't think H17 is bad.
* White still gets to build a moyo. Black should probably have played F16.
what should white do in this situation instead?  * This move looks strange. Black can get out at A. A would be the typical point to attack the black stone.
D14 first for black?  * Yes, D14 would have been a good idea.
* Now White's moyo is gone while Black has some potential at the top. This is due to White's mistake at H12.
* This makes White very heavy. White should just sacrifice H17.
* Hane is a better attack. See Variation.
any better answers to q2 in this situation?  * P2 is the typical answer. I think R2 is too passive.
* S7 will kill this.
N9 instead of L7 kills?  * Yes, I think so.
white resigns  * Thanks for letting me review this game. I think both players played reasonably most of the game. White had the better start. H12 and J17 were the mistakes which cost the game.
Neelith [12k]: hello and gg
(I usually play at least one stone on a 3-4 point, but was experimenting a little with the 4-4 / influence play)
(Could've pressured a bit more with F5 but wanted to remain secure & keep sente)
The exchange that follows seems very much in Black's favor. I think I would have come in from the bottom, trying to keep sente so that I could cap at P10 as soon as possible..
This gives you some breathing room, at the cost of some nice territory for B.
(Seems a bit random, wasn't sure where to play next, perhaps H17 would've been better - making a fist)
(Wanted to keep some influence in the center as the group already has a base, also keep black divided to an extent)
The marked stones are beginning to look lonely.
This seems very passive for B.
(Again a bit random, couldn't see a point for invasion but didn't like the size of black's moyo so played to limit it & to work with H13 / P7)  Just some general thoughts.  You have a nice wall, and a nice moyo around C7.  However, you have almost no territroy, and you still have to worry some about keeping the marked groups alive. B has two large areas of solid territory, and a group in the upper left that should have no problems, given that he has your weak two stones to attack.  So: 1. Use your moyo - extend it and/or solidify it into solid territory. 2. Use your wall - its basic purpose is to drive a weak B group into it. Which means you need to create a weak B group.  Your options there are to split off the F3,H4 stones, or make your moyo so scary he has to invade. 3. Secure you weak stones.  Given the above, I would tend to consider moves like the lettered points. (Though I don't think I could make D would actually work, I would consider it in the search for ways to create a weak B group.)
This seems to be the wrong direction.  Your potential territory (which is getting disturbingly small) is in the marked area.
What's wrong with C4?
(Happy to build this wall but not liking the open side around J4)  This is not a wall you should be happy about.  What does it do for you?  Look at the discussion at move 40.  What has changed?  You've traded your moyo for a very small amount of real territory, and solidified B around H4. In other words, you are now significantly worse off than you were 20 moves ago.
Bad move by B, this is basically a pass.
(Thought I would add a bit more pressure here to solidify K17, D16, D12 areas)
(Being too greedy as I saw D13 could make B have a false eye, and potentially vulnerable.  Makes no sense in retrospect.  Also an empty triangle - awful)
(Top left looked pretty determined so I switched to hassle this group, threaten to split it off but hopefully end up with a wall facing into the centre, or helping the bottom right group)  I don't know, there seem to be some interesting possibilities.  At the very least, you should be able to close off the marked areas in sente.
Very nice.
Small move by B
Another small move.
(Don't know why I cared to save this stone - also got carried away in the attack to secure a minor gain over outside influence.  Should've played around H7/8 in retrospect, might've cost me the game)  Yes.
(Trying to force B towards my thickness as I was unsure how to stop his incursion into the centre)  You force a weak group into thickness for advantage in fighting.  This is a snake off of a strong group.  You are just driving it through your best shot at territory.
(Out of interest could I have invaded here, at P15 or O16 maybe?  I was playing safe to avoid battles and secure the center as I felt I was ahead at this point)  O16 works to reduce in that area.  As far as being ahead, um...only if the entire center becomes your territory. (Assuming you are counting the F15 group as alive.)
Closing the marked borders is important, and you still have the potential killing sequence shown around move 75.
Given the access B has beneath, this move doesn't seem to be protecting much territory.
Misclick by B?
A very small move. Almost anyplace near the marked areas would be better
A mistake by B
(Got a bit lucky here)
(Hopefully bring this incursion to an end, sacrificing a few points at the side)  Another very small move. The incursion was basically already over.  You have much larger moves.
Another mistake by B
B finally solidifies his weakness up here, and the game is basically over for you.
(Probably got lucky here too)
A nice move.
(Er, oops)
B gives you a chance to recover from your mistake
(Wondered why he wasn't playing P13, maybe he'd seen something else... d'oh)
You have sente, it is the endgame.  Start with the moves that keep sente (or gote moves that are worth approx. twice the sente moves).  I only see the triangled ones. (Though H16 is small enough it compares with the larger gote moves.) Then the larger gote moves, like the square marked ones.
(He played a number of these endgame moves, which I thought were fine because they were giving me sente which I could use to prevent his sente moves - probably lost me some points?)  See comment on move 185
(Oops)
Another mistake by B
I don't think this was necessary.
dbstraight [11k]: best of luck calcal [14k?]: nice to meet you
This is not usually played here, unless white already has other stones in the area. A, B and C are more standard replies to the C8 pincer.
This is a mistake. Here, this move is forcing black to jump out and cut off white's two groups. After black E8, white will have to work hard to make use of all of the stones. Although I wouldn't be too concerned with learning it this point, A is the usual joseki.  See the variation.
The idea behind this was to build up more strength toward the top and then jump into 3-3 and make a living group.
Now the two triangle stones are wasted, with no real profit. Also, there is still plenty of room to invade between the three top stones.
I recently saw this move in a pro game, and it seemed quite aggressive, and thus fitting for a handicap game.  -------  It's good to try new things, but this seems inappropriate in this situation. You're still far behind on handicap so you want to start a fight, but just not here. Black's two stones aren't completely settled just yet, and white's formation in the top left corner is relatively solid. Possible alternatives are to play around A or B. A with the intention of making things difficult for black's left group, while making a base at the top; B with the intention of claiming some territory in the other corner.
I'm not sure thaat this is necessary. If black tries to cut, white can catch it in a ladder with D13. Better to start looking for big points, or looking to start a fight somewhere. A to C are worth considering.
Very small move.
Unnecessary response. There are bigger points on the board. You still need to catch up on handicap.
Black should just capture if black wants to play locally. However, it is already alive and should probably tenuki.
This seems ok. Black lives very small.  -----------  Black made a mistake and got sealed in. However, black actually has around 11 points. That's a considerable amount of territory. In exchange, white got no solid territory. The group at the top is connected, but still open on the right, so there isn't much territory there if black plays around A.
Black should not play here immediately, but should be aware that A is possible in the future if the opportunity to take advantage of the cut arises.
Good big move, marking out territory. Every move that marks out moyo like this makes it more difficult for white to invade. However, A to C are still possible.
At this point, I think an invasion is starting to look like a good idea, but this is not a bad move. It tries to map out some territory on the top while putting pressure on white's lone stone in the corner.
However, this still helps black mark out potential territory.
Looking to build up a nice position on the top. Perhaps L17 instead.
Maybe allow black to connect for the sake of maintaining influence.
Use the attack to build up strength on the left.  ------------  This makes white extremely overconcentrated. White is using many stones to surround a relatively small amount of territory.
This does not disconnect.
This was ill-advised.
Overly ambitious. Black's two stones cannot be caught unless that is what black wants. It seems that you're too concerned with capturing. This will nullify any potential that the marked stones may have (which were already a mistake). Maybe try something in the lower corner. The stones still have some aji, and in the future may be able to do something.
White is connected, but doesn't gain any points, while black is gaining strength below.
This probably deeper into black's territory than I could've hoped to invade, but it still doesn't do much good if I can't kill anything or get another invasion in. Black is at least 75 points ahead here.  --------  This is a result of white trying to snake through territory that isn't even black's yet and thus forcing black to build up a strong wall and get territory in the center.
Not consistent. Better to just invade directly.
I think instead of trying this method of invasion, I should've just jumped in somewhere along the bottom and hoped for the best. At this point, certainly the game is lost.  ------------  You seem very concerned about developing your own groups and trying to somehow tear apart what your opponent has. There is a proverb that says to play away from thickness; this includes both your own and your opponent's. In this game, you kept playing close to your own stones, and not only did you not profit from it, you helped black increase his own strength.  Just take a quick look and compare your territory at A, and black's territory at B. A is overconcentrated and didn't benefit much. In comparison, B played stones further apart and got more territory.   This problem of getting overconcentrated is especially dangerous when playing against a handicap. Black is already at an advantage, so getting heavy and overconcentrated just makes it an easier game for black. Keep an eye out for the big points on the board. A hint: look for the big open spaces. When you're behind, you be seeking out profitable fights.  When there's a lot of room, you can and should invade. In this game, it just looked like you were too afraid to approach black's stones which seemed to outnumber your own. Play normally anyway. Even if you don't have any special strategies in a handicap game, play normally and eventually you'll start to catch up. There is a reason why there is a handicap in the first place.
Let's get to it !
Here you have to defend the corner. Taking the side allows black to damage too badly your corner and settle in the process. A is in order I think.
Here A and B seem strong for black. You will need to play for a small corner life while black gets strong outside, annihilating your moyo and getting strong enough to dodge an attack.
Here A seems very logical (see variation).
Drawing back in a tobi like this is a very very unsual move. The only purpose I can see is to prevent black from making too big a corner, but this is a bad result in a corner which was part of your moyo !
It would have been even better to get the A point for black. But this corner result is good for black anyway.
Now that you exchanged A for B, black's connection at C is less necessary
You still have a small aji with A, then cut at C, where black must choose between losing the 2 corner stones or getting his 3 stones cut, but it doesn't work well for the moment (see variation). Without the "triangle strones" exchange, A would be really strong on the contrary !
Here A was big, extending you moyo while reducing black's one. On the other hand, your 2 marked stones were already almost settled, so C13 is an interesting point, but much less than A..
If this move is not followed-up, making this exchange seems a bit dubious for black. A was strong.
If black does not plan answering at A now, he should not have exchanged I think.
Ok. Instead of the game move, black could have played A as well, then answered B with C. In any case, the marked stone gives black a very strong attack against your invasion ; do you see how big it would be to have a white stone there instead ? Now black would be in your shoes, having to make a very tough invasion in your moyo.
Now the shape is to play at A, then black B, then you go out in good shape with C or D.
your shoulder hit makes back very strong, while your marked stone is hurt badly, so a shoulder hit is usually not the good shape move.
Here the shape for black is to hit your 2 stones on the head at A. In general, you should avoid as much as possible being behind in such a front confrontation. The player with the moves gains a lot by being the one who plays the hane on the head of the opponent's stones, especially if he is strong in the surronding area, as black is here.
When black fails to hane, you settle in a much better way than could hope when invading his moyo. You could make shape at A, or go out quickly at B. You decided for the hane C, which is more recommended when your opponent is not that strong in the surrounding area. But it's quite ok I think.
Here you have a forcing move at A which gives black bad shape. His marked stone is ill-placed, and you will make him overconcentrated while either settling on the side or getting strong enough on the outside to be safe. It would have been the safest course I think.  You decided to play B, but it doesn't give you two clear eyes, so if you don't want to play A, then something like C might be recommended. You get a strong shape, with an easy path to the center, and the "triangle" stone would not be in danger (even if it was, you don't care too much losing this one stone , because black is already so strong in the surronding area (the corner) that it would make him even more overconcentrated).
Black forced you to connect at A where you wanted to connect anyway, so you get the sente back. Note that settling this easily, not giving black an outside strength, and getting the sente is an awesome result for you. I think the game is back to equal now.  The problem is that your marked group is not that strong, as black is completely settled in the corner, so maybe spending one move to reinforce your lower side moyo would be in order, like D or E. C would also have been a good point if you had only one stone instead of two at F and G.   Your move expands your moyo to the biggest extent, which is always a good idea, but the presence of the square black stone makes a big moyo much less efficient, unfortunately.
You lose sente here, which would be ok if the whole low and right area were your moyo, but not here as the marked group is out. It will be very difficult to make a significant territory in the center, so being more territory-oriented here would have been a good idea.  Here black decided to invade the bottom, which is a good idea, but instead of playing A, he'd have been better off playing B or C I think, to possibly  threaten more closely you bottom left group in the future, and be as far as possible from your big triangle wall.
PM:  This is where i perceived my difficulty beginning.  I was trying to keep in mind that the best way to attack an invasion is by not attaching..would the cap at M5 have been better?  You're right, attaching is almost never a good idea in such a case. I would say that you erased your first mistake (the corner sequence) with the success of your top invasion, so in a sense your difficulty is beginning again with the two A-B moves that lost sente for too small a profit, yes.  As your marked group might be hurt if they lost their basis, for instance if you play C and black plays D, I think your game move was best. When attacking, reinforce where you're weakest and push your opponent towards where you're strongest.
Now you have to decide the direction of your attack. As a general principle, attack from the side where you are the less strong, in order to push your opponent into your strength. Here your strength is the marked wall, so you should attack from the other side, to extract the most value from the wall that you obtained at a high cost.  A would be good I think, making it very hard for black.
Here on the contrary you reinforce the side on which you're the strongest, getting overconcentrated, while leaving open to black the easiest escape path (towards the top or left)
Ok, now this is the right direction. Maybe your cut at B gets more interesting now. Black should continue to jump (A) I think.
Ok, this is the right move.
Now the peep at A followed by B  is best I think. See variations (I think this attack gives very good results for you, but it's very tense and quite unnatural ; but it would have been a lot easier if you had pushed black directly towards your wall instead of playing the square stone at the start of the attack.
Playing at A  instead would have been safer for black.  In any case, you seem a tiny bit behind on territory, and there are no big territorial points left.
If you want to definitively settle your top group, A would be best I think. Whatever black answers, he's got bad shape and there'll be bad aji left.  Here black might answer at B to make his lower group safe. Other interesting points include the forcing move at C, and when you answer it at D the E cut stops to be a threat.  F is interesting as well to prevent you from making center territory, as well as G after the C-D exchange
I don't like this black move
Now A is a real threat for you, so black needs to protect it absolutely I think. In any case, the marked stones exchange was no good for black.
This is very loose defense, I think the hane A is good for you. Your top group is settled, and your center 3 stones seem rather safe for the moment (plus you always have the sente move at B to defend it), so resuming the attack would be very profitable for you.
PM:  Failing to play K13 here would come back to bite me later, I thought there was still a good chance I could isolate the K9 and J11 stones.  Your top group is strong enough so that there is no need of making shape at K13. You always have a sente exchange at A, and after B you can connect at C for instance, making it necessary for black to add one move, so you have two eyes without problem I think. Plus you still have a good opportunity to flee in the center.  To my eyes, you can play D all along this sequence.
The connection between the marked stones and A is very loose, so if you want to play here you'should play B instead of this keima.
A is very interesting for black now and in the future, unless you make the L6 peep of course (which you should indeed do).
Ok. Your A-B connection has been a bit damaged with the center sequence, but this is still very strong.
See variation
... but this seems even better.
Here you have the killer move : A ! B and C are miai then. (With or without the L6 peep, according to your taste, see variations)
This stone you atari here is unimportant unfortunately :(
Ok, now black is alive everywhere. Yet you have the huge sente profit at A at every time until the very end,  and in the western/center area, the move for you is B, cutting black's dragon (not C).   So you must start with the forcing move at D, to cover your 3 center stones in sente, then you have two big profit sente sequences to be played : A, and B to attack black's dragon which is not clearly alive yet. So you should be ahead anyway.
Now that you gave A to black for free, B is (a little bit) less threatening.
You force black to repair his cutting point at A :( If you don't want to play A neither now nor in the future, you should play B or C instead of this move, to threaten A. When black protects, you get sente back at least.
You should not play this, it's very small. Abandon your 1 stone to black if he wants to capture it, it's better than finishing gote.
PM:  I smacked myself on the forehead when black played here.  Yes, this is why your tobi at A should have been played at B, sooner in the game.
Here you cut in gote two groups which are connected through your captured stones.
Totally unnecessary. The biggest for black would be to defend A, and then there is a good forcing at B for black, and a big move at the bottom as well (if you play there first, the atari at C followed by D seems to make a big capture, so black should defend at N4 to this respect).
Here you threaten to kill 2 stones with A, but it's only worth, say, 6 points :( there are bigger moves everywhere on the board (even others than those I've mentionned before. Try to find them !)
This also is small, compared to others.
again, why play this stone ? it doesn't give you any point :(
This point has value 0,5 for black ... If you play back the sequence of 20 moves that just happened, and try to guess how many points each move were, and compare with how many points (roughly) a move like A, B or C is worth (not even speaking of big captures like D and E), you'll learn a very important thing in fuseki : your opponent usually play moves of little value, so you should not answer automatically with a local move, but look back and consider the whole board. Big points are usually to be found if you decide to look for them.
PM:  I hung on to as much territory as I could, but from here on out the rest of the game is essentially Yose.  Actually it's been yose for a long time already, and you two have played moves of value between 0,5 and 4 points. You don't need to hang back to 3 points in the area in which your opponent just played, while there are big moves everywhere !  Compare black A with white B for instance, the difference is huge !  Similarly, C is not only big but also sente for both. D is big too and sente too ... and so on.
Ok, here you are the first one to go for a big point, good.
Now, you played A. How many points do you think it is worth ?
3 points exactly (E1, F1 and E2), in gote for both players. I'll comment only a few more moves after this, including how many points A is worth (try to guess it, it's a good exercise, you just need to compare the result when black plays here first (and the subsequent sente moves) to when you play there first. And see whether the sequence is gote or sente. If it is sente, then playing this sequence first ensures you points while retaining to sente to take the next big point afterwards !
Also try to count how many points this is worth compared to if black plays A first. You'll see it amounts to much more than almost all the last 50 moves you or your opponent played.  The difference between this move and B is that B is sente : the very best would be to start taking profit in sente with B, then do the same with C, and then only take the big point at your move.
Note that up to here A was still playable.
A is sente for black now, this is why playing B14 was worth 6 points in sente for both players.
white can just take the second corner
you can just defend easy
wrong direction by black
so white overplayed heare
bad for white
artmengo [16k]: HELLO GG Nicoch [18k]: ^^
weird move by white if you want kill
you can still do this  ok i fink thats all , thanks for viewing my review
A: R10 is probably better at H16, its a good opportunity to attack white white gaining territory.  Also, R10 is a little bit low.
I wanted to make my group strong enough to help with any further developments around the bottom, but maybe B3/B4 was a bad exchange?   A: I would stick with F2 in place of B3
AP: At this point, its probably better to move at g4, your group is safe and you can escape the corner
AP: h16 is probably preferable.  High moves are better on the attack, particularly in this case because white can go on top of your stone at H16, build a wall toward the center and toward his other wall, which will later be a problem for you.
I considered r7 instead of q12 but thought it would only provoke white to secure the bottom. How was this opening so far?  AP:  His group at top is still weak, you should attack it and make profit while you still can.  Consider moves at H15 or J16.  Also, if you move at the right side, he will be able to play H16, and really limit your territory.
No big points left, so I thought it was time to reduce white's growth a bit. Is that appropriate here? Also, now that I look at this move again, D8 seems one line too deep. Maybe E8? Other options?  AP: This move does seem too deep, but additionally it is too early to reduce.  You have a big point at top, at H15, where you can get your opponent on the run, and gain profit.  Furthermore, P4 seems like a better place to start reduction.
i was trying to play lightly (I do tend to avoid contact with enemy stones), but it didn't work at all.
so this failed...
trying to stabilize p4 and keep white stones separated. I think I was too focused on preventing white from getting territory here instead of thinking about how black could build.  AP: The purpose of keeping white stones separated is to keep them weak and chase them for profit, however, in this case, the white stones are so strong, there is no reason to separate them.  Consider moving at R5 instead, and building influence towards the center and right side.
I like chasing weak stones, but i'm not very good at it. How should I have gone about this instead?
AP: Here is where you went wrong.  While I agree r9 looks like the natural move, it seems to fail, so I tried Q7 and I think I got slightly better results for black, I included a sequence showing what I saw.
The entire sequence from 69 (Q8) to here seems a little unproductive, and my stones aren't working together. What should I have done instead?
AP: Instead of this move I prefer D12, but that might be wrong.  My friend said he prefers C12.  I included a sequence for D12.
AP: on your next move I think you went wrong, instead of what you played, i would suggest M10, variation included.
I didn't see this coming, so the rest of the game features me trying to save the middle stones and catch up after giving w center territory. The endgame saved me, but I'd prefer to not dig a hole in the first place.
By this move white is throwing away the only corner he could have had. The plan is of course to make influence, which is so important against handicaps. I like this move myself. And as black, I don't hesitate to take the corner. But any move is ok here.
[MAFU] What should black play here instead of p15?  This is kind of exotic move not many people play. Its played bu few top pros, like Takemyia and is probably only possible in san ren sei.
[MAFU] White's position looks very weird. What are the weaknesses that can be exploitet by black?  This kind of overextension is wrong. K16 would be ok, its about the same good ditance to the top left corner as this move.
[MAFU] Is this reasonable?  Its too tight towards the corner. He can live there anyway, so too much presure is not advantageous. And on the other hand it doesn't help attacking g16.
[MAFU] N16 looks like a move that can only be played with a strong white environment. I think white is too weak to play here, but how can black punish her?  Yes, very bad move. M17 cannot be captured by any means, it only strengthtens the stone against the top left, while the white top right will have to make some gote for living later.
[MAFU] I decided to just take the corner in sente and leave m17 as aji for later.  The corner looks very nice, but this move doesn't fully use advantege of white misstake.
[MAFU] Is this position good for white?
perfect for black. he is not interested in jumping to the top side and now he can take lot of profit. Bad play from white.
Since white is much stronger on the top now, B O18 is not sente anymore.
[MAFU] Is this pincer reasonable?  It's not. What's your plan with the pincer? You can either settle or build a wall. But neither is good or possible, because of the w strength on top.
you are ok now
[MAFU] Is this move correct?  m3 also good
Now this move is fine, there is no urgent place. Taking at O18 is also large enough.
[MAFU] How to react to this invasion?  This invasion is nothing to fear. By the way you are absolutely ahead in territory, so you can play absolutely safely. The point is not good for invading, sice it can't attack anything. Q8 would be more severe.
[MAFU] I decided to just take my territory and leave white weak  I think is the best variation
[MAFU] This looks like an overplay
[MAFU] Correct?  Yup
Big mistake, it doesn't help you in any way, but connects white.
now you are move behind
[MAFU] How to answer this invasion?  This kind of move is hard to answer, but also doesn't urgently need one.
You dont need to answer this.  Playing there is important when you want to keep white eyless, this is not the case. You can play P7 now.
huh?
[MAFU] Somehow white managed to die.. but he should have lived, right?  actually he maneged to take points from your corner, all should have been yours.
lol, not too brave, is he?
[MAFU] Should black treat J4 as kikashi and just abandom it now?  absolutely not. The white response increases the bottom, so you would only help him, if you leave it there.
[MAFU] I decided to cut white. Is this reasonable?  It works, so yes
[MAFU] Is this a good result for black?
[MAFU] This looks like an overplay  white really doesn't have time for this
[MAFU] The white center looks kind of dead now  yes, but this move is far from it, it could be a bit better. But I can't find a clear way to kill it, it will always have some space to struggle
[MAFU] Where should black play now?
[MAFU] What can black do now?  now you are in trouble
[MAFU] From here on, i had no idea what to do. The next 30 moves are more or less random play :(  yes :)
again, force before defending. you want to defend, right? so play the atari. If he connects, good for you. If he doesn't, no need to defend.
now he doesn't need to answer it.
[MAFU] This looks better for white, right? Black had more stones here before the sequence but now white destroyed all territory.  you have many stones there, but very disorganized, like the k,l13. he takes your territory while you try to connect them all. But there probably wasn't a better way.
...
[MAFU] Only small endgame from here on.
[MAFU] I missed that this move is sente :(
Here I feel like protecting the corner and then he does quite the same thing to each corner in turn
Depending on how you like to play, you can either attack weaker W groups, or you can very solidly.
Not really threatened by the last move I try extending my corner, maybe a better choice would have been to work on the bottom side ? Trying to link my corners that are not separated by white's stones ?
Here I tried to prevent him from reducing too much my corner
Reducing white's space: -go along the 3rd/4th line. these lines are important and contain a lot of points in them.
Here the idea of going over him on the left side came to mind thus reducing his space
Trying not to be splitted in two small corners
Down right corner seems closed now...
Trying to find a way out of up right corner
Here I feel like left side is good for me, closed him in this space
Still trying to get a link out of this up right corner
This was probably too close, too heavy  It's fine. Heavy means it is hard to make it live, but you can't sacrifice it because it's survival is important to you. Your group is alive.
Also trying to reduce white's upper space  Good place to play. Makes a 'box'. Boxes are good.
Here he starts a long sequence of border closing... Where I can only follow his moves
Pushing a bit to get some space in the middle
That was stupid... I should have thought it more before playing there
And I keep playing what I begun...
Here I see I made a mistake
Taking a bit of space in his territory...
I don't see why he played here...  Bots don't actually think. They play by pattern. There has been no evaluation that the little dead black group is not dangerous.
This too I tried it but that was a mistake...
Closing borders...
No threat here. play somewhere else.  eg: h14, other border closing.
This one, I thought it was noone territory and once I played realized it was already his terriotry :(
Otake:  Would K10 be more consistent?  I sometimes play that after having read Go Seigen's Way of Play for the 21st Century.   Both would be consistant, but it's a matter of style, I actually play a 3-4 here, but that's just me, but this move is as consistant as possible.
Otake:  Would H5 be better?
this is an overplay
this wall and exchanges are very good for black, white has only made the game harder, you punished his overplay of H4 very well.
Otake:  I thought about O16 but opted for this with the idea of making R14-R10 overconcentrated.   The only thing about making white overconcentrated is that it goes from a weak group to a strong group.  I would say this is the biggest mistake in the game
Otake:  I knew the ladder was bad for Black but I thought my ladderbreaker would be better than it was.  Was P15 best?
now that white's group is much stronger is becomes harder to use the Q5 wall
now that white's group is strong, it makes almost all future attacks nearly impossible
This move is not that useful, although it is sente, the reduction that black gets is still pretty big.
remember do not contact a weak stone
Otake:  I thought Black had too many cuts here to try to kill with B10.
This is a mistake in direction, you are pushing white away from black's strenght.
Otake:  Now I think this was small and I should have played L17.
now white is comfertable and safe
Otake:  At this point I still thought Black was ahead in this no komi game.  that would be hard for me to say, I think black had missed several good oppurtunities in the game and besides white's big mistake in the beginning white has only been catching up.
Otake:  Too small?  O9 better?
Otake:  This group dies and seems to be where I lost the game, but I thought Black's thickness would help more than it did.  Middle game fighting is the weakest part of my game.
white it comes to fighting, unless you'll capture stones right away, this type of move is bad, because all you are doing is removing one of black's libs and therefore making him weaker.
again, just loses a lib
and now black is in pain because he is sort on libs
You need to keep in mind that walls are used for attacking and not making territory, if you use them to attack, the territory will come. E18 is bad direction, and Q14 was a missed chance. Also it is important to remember not to waste libs for 1 point sente gains, if they are sente you should get them later in the game anyways.
My first question is about his opening is this a good opening it kinda through me off when i first saw it.   I'm not too sure about this opening, but it is better to take the upper right corner first
would there have been a much better to move than here  the 4-4 , or any upper right corner move would been better
a must, to protect your corner
slow
bad move
way too slow
now white settles , bad for black
bad move, white can approach that corner easliy
slow , not good enough
In this move i played here because a guy i had played before that was stronger than me told me that this is a strong weakness on here but when i looked at the joseki there was nothing about this move.    even the dumbest can be good , if you read properly and your opponent make mistakes. at this case its a bad move, since it makes white stronger
too good for white, black should have attack earlier instead of pulling back
again, too close, but in this case white puts pressure, so its a good move
should i have taken the corner instead of moving here    yeah, its probabaly better if you did, but its not a bad move
too soft and slow
bad move, has no direction towards the game
slow, black won't die don't worry and go to another spot
too good for white, moyo ( potential area ) is too big
slow, but its needed
useless move
way too slow spread out more
would have been better to move at Q18 instead of Q17  no it didn't really matter, because white suppose to die anyways, if q 18, see the following moves
wrong move made an eye for white
On this move wouldnt it have been better to have moved at C15 or somewhere around there.    yes, but of course , you can attack the white stones, due to the wall you made to attack the stone in the middle
slow !!
bad for black, good for white
intresting move but not good
too defensive, try to attack more in games
I moved here because the guy i was playing had a lot of influence so i knew i needed influence. would there have been a better way to get influence.  if you are talking about the bottom left, that is the best way to get influence
slow move
good move, but maybe you want to decrease the right side influence
bad jump, too many cuts left open
slow move
slow again :should attack
too defensive
not needed
Should i have just ignored this move   yes, your group is alive no matter what he do to you
not needed
not needed
useless see the following moves :
not needed
shouldnt white have been focusing on stopping my influence in the middle?    yes, because there is basically nothing left for you , except to  trap the three stones at the right side
bad result for black, should have attacked this group way earlier
this is where i made a huge mistake i thought i could cut off some of his territory but instead i ended up losing a lot of mine.
pmurphy:  The first in a string of unreasonable-seeming 3x3 invasions.  I followed a previous reviewers advice to continue to extend along the bottom as long as white cares to, but I think I may have needlessly given up sente at the end.  switch: you played it perfect (except one minor move) don't worry about playing something else as the 3x3 is not very clever here.
A is better; now B is sente for white.
switch: same here
pmurphy:  In retrospect I'm not very happy with this move.  I was worried about the life of my western group.  switch: what would you have done with an 14k as opponend? would you also be worried about? ... its one single stone against a very thick wall.   I would ignore it ... even with a second stone later played in this area white would have lots of trouble getting life itself   Ok how about your answer!? ... you move is very bad here.  If you like to attack that white stone you should not touch it. The next logical move for white is A, leaving your stone with 2 liberties against 2 stones with 3 liberties each ... you are in defence  I would have played something around E ... if you worry about your stones D or B would be nice as white has to connect F and G somehow to catch your stones.
mostly the cross-cut is a bad move. you are complicating the situation which is wrong in your case as YOU are the strong one in this area.   you should complicate only if you are somehow behind or weak.
that stone is wasted as A is already yours ...
you don't need to protect that 2 stones; there are not that helpless.
that stone is the next logical target for white B or C is nessesary ...
ok. compare that situation to move 45.   45: your stones have 2 liberties, 47: your stones have 2 liberties.  95% of all moves adding 2 liberties to a group are wrong.  white gets strength, you get nothing.
lucky ... white should have connected.
seperating at A may have been better ... it would be hard for white to protect 2 groups ( without a base or eyespace! ) at the same time
again, don't touch what you are attacking !!!   How about A (destroying eye-space) B or C (keeping the white stones seperated to attack E ...
i don't get it ..
no! you gain nothing here ...  white can't make an eye here; it would be a false eye ...  How about A?
you are lucky ...
no! that makes A a sente move!
hmm ... how about A or B  the white group needs 2 eyes to life ...
pmurphy:  Right direction?  wrong one ...  A is to close for the wall you get now ... B would be perfect for a wall going down and A could give you sente this time ;)
How about A or D? Attacks B and C at the same time.  you could do that as there is not a single weak black group that could be attacked by white
right spirit ...  the cut at A would not work as both black groups can live itself ...   But i would play at B as than there is absolute nothing the white stone can flee to ... now white could try to  connect somehow to the center.
A creates a mojo for black   but the other side is open so black only attacks without gaining something if the attack fails
huh????  if you like to cut ... DO IT  you stones gives white some time to recover and strengthen it stones  A would be nice as W can cut at B catching one of your stones ...
whit gets strong now
A or B!  if white connect its stones it would be big
no ...   just ignore it ... its worth nothing ...  there is still something at A or B possible
an empty triangle is wrong mostly
ignore ...
pmurphy: unnessisary?  yes ... and it looks ugly also ...   A (if it would be nessesary ;)
you trying to catch the dragon at A and C ... but you have to watch at B
I like A
pmurphy:  after this move by white i decided to cut my losses and try to end up with white being locked out of my eastern group.
no!  catch the Dragon at A whith B e.g.
too close; there is also a weakness at A so B would be better this time
pmurphy:  I completely forgot about the J9 group during this fight, I think I could have saved it with H8   ... see var.
the dragon is gone ...   ill stop reviewing here as i see no way for black to win this game or any unclearness.  I hope my review helped and sorry if my english sounds a bit weird sometimes ;)
pmurphy:  and the rest is Yose.  Hope you enjoyed the game!
> This is weird: Black has no extension on the left, and White is not building a huge moyo at top either. Fantasy pincer.
i think this black move was a little strange  > Yes, as if Black changed his mind. Still it is quite playable I believe.
>Why not just cut ? Black can enclose you anyway.
> This is submissive. The corner is alive, so White wants to take sente.
> Black missed a good chance.
> Ok to settle the White group. See variations if White wants sente.
> Slow move by Black.
i think i played the wrong move here  > It is ok but the follow-up is wrong.
> "Joseki" move, but White is actually playing into a pincer.
> Heavy.
> Crude move, bad shape.
i think i was already losing by quite a bit here  > Yes, Black gets a thick game.
> This helps Black a lot.
i think this was bad  > Yes, it mostly helps Black. See variation.
> Bad shape !
> Slack shape.
> Nice for Black.
i don't think this move did much  > Right. Black is too safe everywhere to fear this cut.
overplay... but i didn't know how to stop black from making such a large moyo
> This only helps Black.
> Slow move.
actually...
this was... just a stupid waste of a ko threat
i think black is simply alive here, my moves here were strange i guess  > Of course Black is alive already.
that's me running out of time... should p19
is this really neccessary?  > No, White couldn't play there...
and this?  > Ditto.
like i said before this is just to move somewhere, maybe i should have passed
it is unreallistic to not conceder whites moves as they are what prompts your moves. this move seems to me high as both of whites stone are high. for me it would feel better at c15
here with your stone high and again white playing high it is better to do an approach move at c13  which gives you better shape to make an eye on the edge then you can push against the white stone  at d16
this is a very slow move, better is the shoulder hit at e13
I think I should have pincered the white stone around   (d, 10). What do you think? your really need to settle your three stones first with a move toward the edge to get one eye in which to make a dragon tail in which to whip the white stones and once you have one eye it is much, much  easier to make the second eye later. this feels very unblanced, not good. there is no power in your stones.
here you still neglect your three stones, here a black stone at either c15 or c16 is called for
I think my opponent could have taken advantage of this in so many ways. goes without saying
I wonder why my opponent played else where and didn't make a base for his stones.  ask him, but he will not be able to tell you
this move should be at  j16 but without at least one eye it is not that good, but again a stone at c15 first which end with an eye for black then a around h13
Do you thik that i was only able to kill this group because my opponent misread? you nor your opponent can read at this level, what you should be doing is counting counting is by far the most important aspect of the game, as it will let you know if you have to fight or not, and if you do have to fight, it means you are behind and will have to start a ko fight
this was whites loosing move, because a white stone at j12  all but captures the four black stones
Was this a good pincer? (any move is good only if it works)  I don't think so because my pincered stone could become severly attacked. what can i say.  at this point baring you dropping dead are so far ahead, ie. the three stones different between your opponent (one stone is about 13 stones difference) so that would be 39 points you  where ahead befor a stone was placed on the board.
see what I mean.  A wasted move. then why did you play r14?????
i will tell you why you did not , YOU DO NOT KNOW HOW TO FIGHT so you play moves that do not cause a fight
i have to comment here, white can live in the corner with a ko fight or capture the five black stones in the center and at this time in the game white is way, way behind so he must play ko, and thanks to the GO GODS, he has way more ko threats than black does so he should win the ko fight.
Why didn't white cut at (H,5) because to cut at h5 is no good, he cuts and you connect all over, still looses the stones
i knew i was ahead so i followed the proverb: rich men don't pick fights. there was no fight ever in this game
here there is no ko threat to you, just take the n1 stone, the stones around white 143 are safe and cannot be taken
N: Up to this move the opening is pretty standard, but this move is usually at A. See the variation
R: This became problematic rightaway, needing alot of moves to settle.
N: I agree that something needs to be done here, but I don't like this move. It makes B too strong in the corner, doesn't make a lot of territorry and is gote for you. I would rather go out into the center.
N: Overall this seems a bit low, all your moves are on the third line. Of course this can work too and is a matter of style/taste too, but I would try to build something on a larger scale
N: Too passive, I think
R: Here I feel I played a good sequence up to M17.  N: I would tend to play a pincer right away. Of course there are many possibilities and it is hard to tell which is the best. If you look at any joseki dictionary, this starting position will probably make up the thickest part of the book... But for one possible way see the variation
N: This is considered a good move if you already have stone around the star point. However, in this case, I think it makes it a bit easy for B to settle.
N:
N: I think B has better moves to reduce the W territorry here.
R: Good pincer ?  N: Seems like the only move here
R: probably not so great should have defended Q8  N: I agree that this move is not so good. One possibility would be to play a forcing move from that direction and the attack from the other side
R: Or may be play Q9 and give up R6.  N: Definitely better to connect the other way here
R: B settled and my group is weak
R: played too fast.  N: Yes, you could resist a little more here...
N: I don't like this strategy here. Better to just get out into the open. If you are going to make eyes locally, i like the variation better
N: I don't get this move. Do you think everything is ok with the group in the center? B should ignore this move and attack the center group.
N: I don't like this move very much, I don't think it does very much for you. On the other hand, B wants to connect there anyway, and W forces him to. looks like a "thank you move" to me
R: B allows me to hook up.  N: yes, very nice of B. I don't know why he is worried about eyes
N: This is pretty nice of
R: that hurt  N: are you sure this is sente? seems pretty hard to kill that group
N: now this for sure is not sente. just play the big moves.
and hurt that too.
N: good, although B let you get away with it pretty easily
N: not good, see variation
N: good!
R: bad move unnecessary.G14 would be logical  N: yes, save the liberties for later
R: b connects and now w needs to live  N: See the variation for the easy way to live...
N: pretty risky strategy, did you read out the capturing race here?
N: up until here i can sort of understand why black answers, but now he has to attack the W group for sure
N: as i showed in earlier variation, better to capture those stones...
N: all groups settled now, only endgame left now. Thanks to the upper right it does not look bad for W, pretty close game now.
now i'm a bit ahead and  should have finished without problems.
N: the other side maybe bigger?
same mistake as F15
N: When opponent play moves like this you should aways check very carefully what he is up to, usually they have a good reason for playing them :)
and again
R: now L15 will hurt but I missed it.  N: looks like B missed it up till now too, the previous few moves were only one point, he should have played there long ago
M15 would have been better..or less worse
R: B is well ahead and wins. I feel however even though I was ahead before L15 I made alot of wrong decisions never really getting a clear lead.  N: Right, this is where you lost the game. No more comments in the endgame  I think in general your opening was very low, you went for secure territorry very quickly, allowing your opponent to take a lot of influence in the center.   On another general note, I think you could benefit from reading more carefully whether a response is actually necessary. A good exaple for this is move 76. If your opponent makes a move that appears to be sente, take the time to see how much damage he can actually do. If your group still survives and you only lose a few points, this is the time to take the initiative and make a bigger move! I think your opponent was even more guilty of this and missed out on a few good opportunities for tenuki...  Hope my commentary was helpful to you, feel free to send me any follow-up questions.
Track12k: hi gg eronel12 [12k]: hi
palleon86:  I would take sente here.  This move is usually an endgame play.
palleon86:  Black takes a definite advantage with this key move.
palleon86:  Be got all the points and W gets nothing.  Remember, when your opponent plays in your area of influence. you must pressure your opponent and try to gain an advantage in either territory or power.
palleon86:  Second line plays in fuseki are usually too small.
palleon86:  This move is barely a couple of points.
palleon86:  I don't see any reason to sacrafice.
palleon86:  If you are going to answer B t4, you should play this move at s5.  If you play this, when B plays t4 you have to say "Thanks for sente".
palleon86:  This is the losing move for you.  It lets you get split and you end up with 3 weak groups.
palleon86:  Your opponents key point is your own.
palleon86:  Choosing between two weak groups is hard.
How to deal with B 33? What went wrong there? How could I make the most of my wall in the north? Was H18 an important position? What went wrong in the south-east? Why was mygroup surrounded so easily?  palleon86:  You had two vital mistakes that your opponent capitalized on.  First, you must attack your opponent's weak groups.  If you are having a hard time finding a move that gains you power or territory while attacking, at least find a move that gives your opponent trouble.  You absolutely can't let him live easily when you have such an advantage in numbers locally.  The second mistake was having too many weak groups.  Its ok to have one weak group if you gain compensation (you create a weak group for your opponent, gain a lot of points elsewhere, or something else).  Having two weak groups is almost always bad.  It gives your opponent a chance to launch a splitting attack and when that happens, you'll often have to choose one group or the other.  Try to keep your stones connected and split your opponents groups.   H18 wasn't ever a vital point in this game.  Before the fighting started on the right, the top side was small; both players needed 2+ moves up top to make a big position.  After the fighting started it became the largest open area so it starts to look interesting but the fighting at this point would have been much bigger.once the fighting settles a play up top looks like the next place to play.  One more thing to remember:  If your opponent plays a "sente" move with a gote follow up, look to see if you can find a big move somewhere else.  Often times playing tenuki two times is bigger.
palleon86:  Here you see that even when W gets the first move, B is getting just as many points in the corner as W is hoping to get on top.
This is probably bad, I should defend the corner.  *Yes. defending the corner is better. Black's direction is good, but there is no reason to grant white a chance to attack the Q16 stone.
*I think this white move is simple and ok.
*This move is probably a slight overplay. But i dont know how to punish :(
*This is too slow. Black already played at A. There is no reason at all to reinforce twice and become overconcentrated.
*Note that White plays on the border of 2 moyo. This is a huge move. If Black continues growing, pushing along the borderline, White grows on a larger scale. Therefore, black would be helping white, so Black must not respond locally.
*This is a good move locally, but White grows a bit faster.
*This white move is very bad.
*Too slow. Black is thick here so he should not respond locally, but play a big move elsewhere (bottom).
*This white move is an interesting reduction.
*I'm not sure whether this black move is correct, but it looks very reasonable.
*This is too heavy. Black can attack white now.
*Too passive.
*Bad move.
I'll stick to the borders and corners as long as he lets me, making safe territory instead of betting on influence.  *Too passive. White reduced the black area without any resistance. By playing 3rd line, Black helps White to build even more.
*Too low and slow.
*Too slow. White should push at A, or create a huge framework at B or just C.
*Black is terribly flat.
*White plays too low.
*This white move is bad shape
attacking the corner.
*I think attaching here is not good.
*This black shape is questionable. Black has too meany cuts and weaknesses.
*This move is very bad. Don't help white to fix his shape.
with a vague idea of attacking triangled group.  *Good idea, but note that white has a strong move at A, so the black cutting stone will fight against many quite strong white stones.
*This move is hurts, but it's needed. Black feels very slow.
*Very bad white move.
*This is terribly small!
*This white move is plain bad.
*Good! Now we can fight!
Still thinking attack, and thus missing the last chance to reduce W's moyo.  *An ongoing attack is ALWAYS more important than reducing (urgent before big).  This is a very complicated situation. White must be careful about the cut at A. The white B and C groups are weak. The reason for these weaknesses are the slow moves white just played. Black should try to gain strength while attacking and splitting the white groups. Later black can quite easily invade or reduce the right side.
*Looks like a big exchange. Black played fine here.
*If you are sure that the corner is dead, then this move is too slow.
*Too slow for white.
By all accounts this should be alive or at least ko  *Yea, white is probably not strong enough to kill. I'll show some joseki sequences.
*Black lives unconditionally if he plays here, but he will not get a big corner.
*This move is of course impossible.
*Too early.
*Be careful!
*Be careful. Are you sure white cannot exploit weaknesses and escape?
This definitely increased the damage
mistake
It's over, no chance to catch up.  *Yep. Even if black had not lost the TL corner, White's ahead. No further comments.
[Agi] Against 2 handicap, white doesn't normally really need to make  major chances in their playing to have a chance of catching up. From this perspective, enclosing here probably isn't much of a problem. That said, I can't help but feel that enclosing is a bit slow.
[Agi] This move feels really slow for white. It's ignoring the fact that black is developing quickly on the left, Something more forceful like A/B feels much more active. White would like to take control of the flow of the game.  Something around C to break up black's formation on a large scale is also worth considering
[Agi] Black is developing calmly over most of the board. If things continue on at this pace, white stands little chance of catching up without something needing to die.
[Agi] This looks really passive, like it was trying to defend the corner.It looks like it's trying to set up an attack on the marked stone, but it feels too far to be helpful when a fight breaks out.  Instead, following up P10 with A/B would be more consistent. Considering something like C or D to change the pace and break up black's framework is also an option to think of.
[Agi] black has successfully turned the top and left sides of the board into something like a 6 or 9 handicap position. Considering that this was a 2H game, white's chances of invading and making profitable life/killing something are much smaller.
[Agi] White finally tries to make an attack, however, black could pincer with A, helping the marked stone, and driving white up into black's moyo.
[Agi] However, black is very calm here. The lone black stone isn't in great danger just yet because there's still a fair amount of slace on the sides, and plenty of black stones up top.
[Agi] It looks like white is continuing to attack that one stone,  However, this shape isn't very satisfying if black gets free. White needs to pay a bit of attention to make sure the 3 white stones don't come under attack themselves. see variation.
[Agi] Black feels more or less safe now.
[Agi] This is probably a good choice of joseki on black's part
[Agi] However, white departs from joseki first.
[Agi] Black just feels like he got much more than he should here. Is saving the marked stone worth taking gote here? How many points would black gain if white just sacrificed it?
[Agi[ Black continues to ambitiously grow his moyo.
[Agi] This move is dubious. Looking from the sidelines, it looks like white is trying to do 2 things.  1) trying to enclose the marked black stones from a distance. However, it will take  at least another 2-3 moves to finish, and there's still the chance that group can make life on the bottom with some help from some combination of a/b/c/d  2) It also looks like white is trying to grow his own framework of stones to reach into black's framework. Except black's framework is much larger, and growing much faster.
[Agi] Again, black knows he's ahead and is solidifying. Every move white avoids invading, the whole top and left side gets stronger. Black reinforces towards the left side since the top right is much more solid.
[Agi] There's really no obvious place to invade, However, some options to consider, see variations
[Agi[ this is somewhat weird, since white can't live inside, and really doesn't want to. So what could white be threatening here?
[Agi] Again, the important side is the outside, and this move seems to be saying otherwise.
[Agi] It's usually not a good idea to abandon a weak group that's being attacked
[Agi] This move is very much sente if you intend to kill black.
[Agi] Play from the weaker side, not to mention this makes an empty triangle for little reason. see variation
[Agi] Why cut here and give black forcing moves? if black is so bent on connecting, a peep would have served the same purpose. You would only cut here if you thought black would get away, and so you wanted to catch the 2 stones as compensation.
[Agi] and black makes the cut white left lying around. There doesn't quite seem to be a way for white to resist.
[Agi] Another strange move. Saving 2 stones isn't important enough when the white group in the middle is in tatters. Black has lived on the bottom, so all the loose cutting points that white created while trying to kill black are still there for exploitation. There is a very strong possibility that white can die in the center
[Agi] Black seems to be assuming that white is alive in the center. See variation
Is this move all right?  or maybe better b4? or e10?  B: After the exchange B4/Black C3 you still need a move like E5. I think E5 is good.
this looks a little agressive...  B: It helps you strengthening your stones. Bad move by black  By the way: Attaching move look like agressive moves, but they are usually not really attacking moves. The strengten boths sides. Just assume you answer C9. Then you see: No attack possible anymore. The real attacking moves come from a certain distance.
how was my reaction?  B: I dont like this move. C11 is better. C11 also defends the cut at D9.
should I better respond to q6?  B: Your move is fine.
i was not really satified with this outcome...looks like a huge weakness around l4  B: Only if you consider the lower right side as your territory you think of a weakness. The white stones H5, J4 and H3 are light.
B: A move like G6 (or G7) is better. Your move is the wrong direction. You are driving black out towards other black stones
now it is stronger - but what do you think about the left side?  B: blacks left side is big. But you will get a lot of the right side. So everything is fine
seems like a good timing  B: Yes, good move.
still wanted to protect... necessary?  B: No. You spent so many moves to make your l"light stones" strong. You should omit this one and play 09 attacking an building a moyo
i was happy with it until here! justified? ^^  B: wrong direction. Play N8 instead. Because of the black move P15 (which you are inviting) you are not connecting to the upper side.
If black presses you must answer! Even if your middle right side stones become weak. They will keep Aji. The difference who plays O16 is to big. There is an entire chapter "the stones go walking" in the book "The fundamentals of Go" with the only theme that in a situation like that you must play O14 or even better O15
B: very bad move by black. He gives you another oportunity to play O16.
B: No! O16. Tis move creates all the trouble you are going to have. Black O16 will leave you with a terrible form.
B: Here black gives you one more chance to play O15. Let him have the corner if he wants.
B: finally the crucial move! Black has locally  got the advantage now.
blacks play seemed again too aggressive to me...  B: No. Turning on both sides of your three stones are strong moves.
whi felt like a big mistake. i should have attaked the lowe group in order to solidify my weks middle group...  B: In addition you are extending from a group in trouble. Not a good idea.
saved - and white has to watch out now
black totally took over initiative - and white managed to place another weak stone on g17. this one only brouht trouble. turned the game  B: Right. But I would still say the main turning point was the question who gets O16
black ignores to oftern, so white can attack again
B: Looks like a losing move by black. Very silly. (Time pressure?)
B: Wrong direction. S10 looks stronger.
now i have to go on the other weak black goup. how to attack best?  B: Make a leaning attack. Lean with M16 on the black stones to attack later. This also strengthens your own weak group.
Very bad form for white. The reason are the two earlier turning moves S16 and O16 by black
B: Only M16 (instead of R18) can help now. you are taking away your own liberty. Black lives anyway now.
really messed up here
bad tenuki? B: Yes! very bad. This move brings you back into the game. Very strange. Black saves a cutting stone which lost all its importance and which was not attacked anyway.  The white cut at F7 is still threatening.
now white can connect and reduce succesfully
great by black!
any advices on the following endgame?  B: The mistake was before that.
peterchris [6k]: unnecessary kaktus [5k]: which? peterchris [6k]: my move
kaktus [5k]: oh
kaktus [5k]: you think you are behind?
is Q8 a better option for white 10?  No, this move works well with your stone at A and it keeps b from expanding his right side territory along the top.
This is not the joseki move for b. He is supposed to play at A. So, A is probably a good reponse for w.
is Q16  more reasonable?  Either that or S17. I think that the game move is solid, but maybe over cautious
This move and the sequence that follows seems to prove that the move at A was not the best. W feels a need to do something here., because a black move at B would leave his position a little small. However I don't really like the results of the exchange.
B gets sente to make this move. W gets a big corner, but b gets a more secure right side and a good claim on the top at the end of the exchange.
The preceeding exchange is forcing b to build his strong right side toward the center., while w is not really getting any kind of territory or real influence in exchange.  A w move at A or B would maybe hold black down better. These moves are out of the question now, but might have been something to aim at before this exchange. I going to guess that maybe you meant this as a leaning attack against b's stones at the top. If that is the case, he sees it in time. His position is a little too secure to fall victim to such an attack.
I was really unsure about A and B, but I like this move a lot!
I like this one too.
this seems like a mistake, as it initiates a ko later  I think that you are right.
This is a very effective cap. If not for it, w would have a huge moyo.
This move is very destructive to your position. I offer another response that I think might work. at A
losing the corner seems like a big loss for black  Yes it is, but b's plays expanding his lower left give him quite a bit of compensation.
This does not seem like a big move to me. A-D seem bigger. Well maybe this is all part of your plan to cut off b's center, but at this point it seems unlikely.
I am trying to decide if you really have to answer b to protect your stones. I don't  really think so and there is no other contested territory here.
A is better if you are going to play here.
Not sure what you are aiming at here. This move doesn't really threaten b and it gets you no territory. OK, I see that you are trying to cut off b's center. Even at this point it seems unlikely to succeed, but you have to try something.
White's attack is probably premature.  Oh, I see now. Yes, but a nice bold try when you are behind.
This is really small, a late endgame move.
This is even smaller. A is bigger and even B or C.
ArionPS [9k]: you too
i dont think that's a good move, as white can afford to ignore it and attack your corner. Better to play at K4. White can ignore that too, but it is played in the right direction regarding whites corner enclosure and correspondends with your D4-Stone.
looks too far to me.
this move is too small. Still K4 would be a good idea, or maybe N17. If white gets to attack your upper corner from the left side it is perfect for him due to his big wall.
not a good move. White should play F3 or O17
you have to react to A... something like C3.
White should ignore K3 und just take the corner.
A move in the corner still is urgent, N3 does nothing
another move that doesnt do anything. Now that your eyespace in the corner is lost, an urgent move would be to play around your N3 stone, else white will be able to attack you there and gain strength. Also there are still some big moves around the upper right corner!
40 is gote!!!
again the wrong direction for white....
not good, just play at O17.
C is much to near whites big wall.  Now you have 4 weak groups. Especially in a handi game it is of big importance to try to build very solid groups which cannot be attacked easily, as your opponent is stronger at fighting.
very very good move by me!!!
white should net react here, after all its only one point.
ArionPS [9k]:  this is a move I often use. If you are on line 2 and your opponent on line 3 you can jump four steps in to his territory  in general. of course there are local exceptions  MY COMMENT AND QUESTION TO THE "Go Ladder sensei":  What move can kill w 121 or prevent it from creating a living group... What are possible sequences here? 2. WHY is 121 such a good move here? I don really understand.... some examples?? THANK YOU.  Comment:  I have never seen this move... if it is at all playable surely depends on the situation. For example if black is very strong around it will only work as showed in one variation. This move is just the biggest move still left on the board, that's why it is good at this point. Another big point for white would be to jump into the corner at B18 or maybe play K5, but this one here is certainly bigger.  As your left side is open (3d line) i cannot think of a way to kill white. this move is very painfull, black should have tried to play around here first, something like C8 to close the side. One possible, very defensive move would be to close your side with A. Of course white gains much territory then, so only play it if you are leading by much.  Ergo there is no "standard" way to react, B11 and K8 can both be played, depending on the situation.
gofishes [12k]: that was a hard one ArionPS [9k]: yes :) ArionPS [9k]: good response gofishes [12k]: thx
ArionPS [9k]: i should have played c8 myself
gofishes [12k]: :D
white can kill your two stones...
too small
gofishes [12k]: you're a shinogi or something? ArionPS [9k]: what is that? ArionPS [9k]: good player? no. but i've learned some easy techniques ArionPS [9k]: this is a move I often use. If you are on line 2 and your opponent on line 3 you can jump four steps in to his territory ArionPS [9k]: in general. of course there are local exceptions gofishes [12k]: shinogi gofishes [12k]: soemone who makes moyo gofishes [12k]: than waits for the opponent gofishes [12k]: and then inaveds gofishes [12k]: kills everything ArionPS [9k]: aha gofishes [12k]: and lives in minimun space gofishes [12k]: good move that is gofishes [12k]: i cant do anything right ArionPS [9k]: hm:) I like that ArionPS [9k]: i think there are two options
gofishes [12k]: really? gofishes [12k]: dunno ArionPS [9k]: that is number one
gofishes [12k]: yay gofishes [12k]: and no 2 ArionPS [9k]: a11 gofishes [12k]: aah gofishes [12k]: ok ArionPS [9k]: but that would have been more difficult ArionPS [9k]: good response ArionPS [9k]: still, don't be gready now ArionPS [9k]: or maybe you can be ArionPS [9k]: sorry, havn't read the situation myself, just placed the stone :)
ArionPS [9k]: yes gofishes [12k]: ah
gofishes [12k]: im kinda tired gofishes [12k]: don understand the situation very well either ArionPS [9k]: you seem to be a good reader gofishes [12k]: really?^^
ArionPS [9k]: better than me I think, but I might have more practise
gofishes [12k]: no don think so gofishes [12k]: but i yes i like to analyze^^
gofishes [12k]: one min ArionPS [9k]: That is good :) I play mostly by intuition these days, but that is due to things beyond go. Analyzing is good way to learn
gofishes [12k]: gonna be right back ArionPS [9k]: ok ArionPS [9k]: no hurry, i'll google :) ArionPS [9k]: I think the best way to learn go (and don't take my word since i'm only 9k) is to play a lot of games and get a feeling for what moves are appropriate, and get a sense of good patterns. Then combine that with solid reading and analysis gofishes [12k]: ok^^ gofishes [12k]: aah gofishes [12k]: yes gofishes [12k]: playing much is great gofishes [12k]: only porblem is that i don have much tim e to play seriously ArionPS [9k]: So if you like to analyze you have a good start gofishes [12k]: hehe ArionPS [9k]: well, that is a common problem:) gofishes [12k]: yeah gofishes [12k]: hm gofishes [12k]: thats what i wanted to do right nmow gofishes [12k]: o1 or something gofishes [12k]: but now you took sente ArionPS [9k]: :) take it back somewhere else gofishes [12k]: ill try
ArionPS [9k]: another good thing is to watch other games. maybe not dan-games, because they might be to complex. but maybe like 3 steps above your ranking
ArionPS [9k]: auch ArionPS [9k]: you had me there ArionPS [9k]: m7
ArionPS [9k]: but maybe better safe than sorry gofishes [12k]: yeah
ArionPS [9k]: still sente
ArionPS [9k]: hmmm gofishes [12k]: suicide? ArionPS [9k]: i don't know gofishes [12k]: but i think if y now respond that i reduce your territory gofishes [12k]: right? ArionPS [9k]: depends gofishes [12k]: if i live ArionPS [9k]: yes, if you live
gofishes [12k]: ok gofishes [12k]: bad move ArionPS [9k]: and in a way you got nothing to loose, as long as I respond to every stone
gofishes [12k]: really? gofishes [12k]: ah yes sure gofishes [12k]: you are right
ArionPS [9k]: good gofishes [12k]: thx
gofishes [12k]: but actually i dont know anymore what i could do gofishes [12k]: oh that  move gofishes [12k]: huh gofishes [12k]: alive ArionPS [9k]: yes.
gofishes [12k]: let it be
gofishes [12k]: i think thats the move
ArionPS [9k]: yes
ArionPS [9k]: ignore ArionPS [9k]: good gofishes [12k]: yup
gofishes [12k]: hm gofishes [12k]: may i ask something
ArionPS [9k]: yes gofishes [12k]: is it any use to shield off the ko at d11 ArionPS [9k]: well ArionPS [9k]: there could be, since you have something to loose (c10) in case you loose the ko ArionPS [9k]: but it is gote gofishes [12k]: yeah gofishes [12k]: thank you
ArionPS [9k]: can you read this?
gofishes [12k]: i live ArionPS [9k]: yes
gofishes [12k]: i hope  i do ArionPS [9k]: hm ArionPS [9k]: i was planning to c14 gofishes [12k]: probably not gofishes [12k]: that i live gofishes [12k]: c14 gofishes [12k]: hm ArionPS [9k]: yes, then you would live gofishes [12k]: oh no gofishes [12k]: ^^ ArionPS [9k]: but i still think you'll manage
gofishes [12k]: well gofishes [12k]: yes i live gofishes [12k]: but perhaps i lose som emoku?
gofishes [12k]: moku (points)
ArionPS [9k]: no, no loss gofishes [12k]: cool ArionPS [9k]: but no gain either gofishes [12k]: okay ArionPS [9k]: in general gofishes [12k]: aah gofishes [12k]: okay^^ ArionPS [9k]: still your shape is very strong now (no ko threats) and if my surrounding walls were thinner you could attack them
ArionPS [9k]: so it was a mistake from my part to attack you ArionPS [9k]: i should have played G6 first, then attacked gofishes [12k]: aah gofishes [12k]: yes gofishes [12k]: probably this would be much better
gofishes [12k]: i am not good at ko fights
ArionPS [9k]: me neither :9 ArionPS [9k]: good to practise
gofishes [12k]: yeah^^
gofishes [12k]: thats funny ArionPS [9k]: what is? gofishes [12k]: the ko "fight" ArionPS [9k]: hehe ArionPS [9k]: well, in this case it is only 1 point we fight over gofishes [12k]: ^^ exactly ArionPS [9k]: but in pro-games ko-fights often decides the game gofishes [12k]: yeah ArionPS [9k]: but it's quite a funny thing gofishes [12k]: yes!
gofishes [12k]: ps: could you perhaps add me 5 min?   I hope the review will be useful to you!  Greetings, Daniel
Is this move right? or is better to make a shimari in the upper left corner?  this move is possible only in some situations, that is when the corner stones are very strong already. Now they are not. White can split black possition eficiently by A in a good shape and black has more trouble than white.   Tenuki would be bad here.
And either is for white, the L15  is very important
Too low - bad possition to the low k17.
White should not play this move, its dangerous.
This black stone is weak
You should attack white harder
This result is very good for white. The black stones have a bad cut, so B doesn't have time to attack anymore.
Why do you play this? There is no advantage in it. But you lost a possibility to play B9 in sente.
Usually its not good to peep like this, e8 is a good shape. But it might be possible here.
White can't afford to play this aggresively.
right
bad bad bad. You have to split your oponents groups!
Now W is save and connected, you are closed inside
Looks like the best point now. Because of the low move at F17 it would be difficult to develop the top side.
The white joseki isn't good for making a territory, but it looks possible.
From here, i see i have a very big move in f2, but just con know whne it would be the right timing to play it. I don't want to play it too fast, before i want to let me the possibility of inading the bottom if i was behind later....  Firstly - G3 is much better. Its so large that white might want to play F2 very soon, so you can play it imediately.  White is very strong there, so its not likely you would want to invade, reduction is suitable. So you can for example try some testing move outside and than take the F3 stone.  This white move is really bad. What does it do? Take away 10 points from black? Looks more like a sacrifice to me.
A bad move. Only helps white.
A bad move, doesn't do any good to you.
Yep, bad gote from white. But this move of yours is also bad, you only help white to make shape.
The white plan doesn't work, so its not good.
This much worse for W than it was before.
Doesn't look like a ko threat. R7 would be, but still small...
Now the game is over.
i missread the life of my group here... moreever i forget to make the ko and Mikael punish me...
Yep, it needs a move. Moreover this move is bad from several reasons. First - its too deep. Risk is the last thing you need now when you are ahead. Second - the white top group is almost dead (if we forgot your is actually) and you should attack it. Even if it lives, the invasion will come by itself.
wow... Why does white tenuki???
And now again!?!
I will end the comment here, because this is not a game anymore :)  Congratulations to your victory :)  White played the game carelessly, 1d should do better. Sometimes it looks like a 10s blitz game from him.
cg: I was taught to always respond to an approach to a 4-4 stone.  Approach to a 3-4 stone can be ignored though.
cg: To here it looks about equal.  I have a slight preference for black.
cg: Consider variation B as well.  It gives up a lot in the top right but I think you'll gain more in the long run.  Variation A feels too passive to me, but is certainly OK.
cg: Now I feel white is starting to get an advantage, with a lot of potential toward the middle.  Black played very passively in the opening, making no pincers.  But still okay here since j4/f4 can be attacked.
cg: This is too early.  Secure your top group in sente first, with one of the marked positions.
cg: See variation B for a nice way to mount an indirect attack on j4.
cg: Variation B takes the corner, simply.  Variation A leaves many weak points, as you found out.
cg: Variation B feels stronger to me.  It secures the c7 group.  It gets black into the center, giving the m10 group a place to run to.  It attacks the c8 group.  Black has nothing to worry about in the top left.
cg: Overplay, as you found out.
cg: c17 is so passive.  I would instead force white to live in the corner while making a stronger group with which to attack the k17 group.  After c17 you won't have that much in the corner anyway.  (Actually B should be at D13 if the plan is to attack white top center group.)
cg: Bad shape.  o18 instead.
cg: p13 not needed.  white should q19.
cg: See variation B.  c1 seems like a "must play" move, even though in the end it turns out black can live.
cg: Passive.  This move only does one thing: gain a few points of territory.  Think big.  Attack entire top center group, starting at r15 then k15.  It doesn't hurt to play these forcing moves.
cg: Making it very easy for white.  h17.  Into the breach!  :-)  I know it's hard to read out h17, but the d16 group is strong and h17 has the support of L18 too.
cg: ??  If you want to play in this area at all, why is e18 better than e16 or f18?
cg: Nice ko setup by white.
cg: Locally, I would respond with B instead.  cg: End of review comments.
B.: My intention was to probe first to find out if white extends to C6 or C7, so that I can adjust the continuation of the joseki in the upper left (see variations).
B.: Yes! A good chance, and so early! I thought.  N: indeed, white should play lower, now he is almost obliged to play first around C10.
B.: I just had to take this point, right? But now the extension is too wide and white can invade.  N: this is a logic point, you want to play around here, white around c10 your move is more severe on the white shape, wich seems to be floating. It is logic to leave a gap, if you get something in return, as playing on a point, annoying to white.
N: slow, and still an open skirt
B.: At this moment I was not so sure about my opening anymore. Both on the left and on the lower side I now have extensions which seem a bit too wide.  N: you can't play fast and solid at the same time. It is also wrong only to look at your own position, include the opponents position as well.
N: not sure about this move, the left seems more urgent to me.
B.: So white comes splitting. N: white still has a problem due to his open skirt.
B.: I know the principle that one weak group between two weak groups is advantageous, but I never know when and how exactly it applies. I thought it's urgent to strengthen one of the groups, so that the other has more leeway.  N: of course
B.: I chose the upper one, because the lower seemed to have an easier getaway, and it also still can slide into the corner.  N: ok
B.: He did not answer the cut. So I thought: If I can get a ladder breaker, I can confine the upper left corner and rule the upper side.  N: white should have answered
B.: But probably I should have pushed through first?  N: no, you can always push later
B.: Luckily I end in sente ...
B.: ... and do what I have planned. Here my opponent and I disagreed in our quick post-game talk. He thought, capturing here was way too slow. I thought it was the only move.  N: it is the only move, it removes all aji, it makes you rock-solid, so the upper side becomes a dangerous are for white to invade, also the white group on the left becomes a lot weaker, as well as the white corner
B.: I thought, this was good for me. My opponent creates another weak group, which might lead to trouble, when I come out and split from E8 later.  N: by playing carefull, this should be ok
B.: Up to here I read the sequence ...
N: here you should have examined the possibility to capture the cutting stones, they are very important, and your corner has a lot of liberties. Don't respond automatically
B.: ... but the following moves finish off my stones, which was not what I was planning. At least I did not find a way to rescue them.  N: you missed your chance
B.: Dead. This felt bad, I thought I had just begun to lose the game after the good start (maybe a bit irrational. After some self-calming I thought to do what I can do with the potential I have.  N: you gave a big present to white, but if you look at the overall position, white has a lot of problems: - Upper left corner seems problematic - Middle left is not connected - Bottom left has a big open skirt and no definite eye-shape  Conlusion: i think you are not behind Plan: kill the upper left or make ko, attack middle left (avoid connection to whites right side) and make a huge territory on top.
N: finally
B.: So attack starts. I want to induce him to give me territory on the upper side while running, and at the same time spoil his potential in the center. I was worrying about white playing M4 in sente against the lower right corner, but now this gote move was just too slow to take it myself.
B.: I had something like this in mind, but I am not sure if there was a way for white to handle the situation differently.  N: white's position was bad already
B.: Here I thought that white might get a second eye on the left side somehow, but confining the group still seemed more urgent, since stopping the white progress there is important for the upper side.
B.: The next 30 moves both of us won't see the aji at the left side for white's survival (see variation), so white won't live and black won't kill! (That probably hurts your eyes, sorry! ^_°)  N: you could have played a simple forcing move (wich might even make ko) against the corner.
B.: Now the cut at H14 might become ugly, and I have to be careful (was I careful?)
B.: Ouch! Didn't see this. Is there a defence? N: Your reflexion should be that killing the white group is very necessary and so i would play there very solid, so i don't have to worry about that
B.: I thought like this I could connect. Pushing would let him cut in sente, and then he could pull H11 out (see variation).
B.: Here I could get the net, just as planned, but ...
B.: ... he managed to cut me apart. Probably now finally I should play B15, but I thought, keeping pressure on the top center group was more urgent (especially since I still didn't see that white could live #^^#).  N: See previous comment, i think you should count.
B.: Phew.
B.: Too late.
B.: Was there a way to kill me here?  N: not that i see immediately
B.: Gote, but the biggest place, I thought. Correct?  N: more important is that it doesn't matter this much. You shouldn't play it because it is big, but because you are largely ahead and this move is very solid. However first you should take p5, because now is the last moment it is sente. No further comments.
> interesting. white is not taking an other corner and is attacking from the wrong direction.
> interesting strategy by white, attacking each corner instead of taking another one...
I'm not sure how to react to punish white for ignoring my E4
Was this move decent? Or should I do something else?  > this is fine. you can also follow w's strategy of ignoring his move and continuing your attack in the lower left or attacking the upper left. i don't think there a single "good" strategy for this, except that you should _not_ always just follow his lead. but if the josekis are correct, there should be any disadvantage going through them.
> beautiful moyo. (for now 8-()
Is this overplay?  > no, i think this is standard as it threatens black Q8.
> first mistake, as far as i can tell 8-). an empty triangle is almost never efficient. see variations.
> it is better to attack from the other side, since white is between a weaker (left) and a stronger (right) group. with this move you're pushing white towards your weak group.
Here, my group is in trouble and will end up being very small. How should I make this group bigger?  > well, the problem was that white cut the first two stones here and of course your miscalculation later didn't help 8-). your play since then has been correct.
> well done so far
Here I made a big mistake, I thought I wasn't able to cut him off.  > yes, that's too bad. it would have been worth a lot.
> i think this is too small for now, better do this in the endgame. of course as long as white answers, no problem, but it doesn't make it good 8-).
> again, an endgame move.
Was this an okay way to reduce white in the top?  > yes, i think this is fine. if white comes here, it's huge.
> a mistakes here on white's part. you can only take that stone in gote.
> very good. white is in trouble here
> you could have saved your stone and come out on top locally.
> this move cost you dearly.
I'm not sure exactly where to jump to respond to white E11  > there is still some vulnerability in white's position if you peek at E7 or come down to C6. look at some variations.
> you both left this spot alone, even though it would have been very valuable. (see the earlier variations.)
> the problem with these is that it's only about 4 points (which is not a problem 8-)) but it is in gote, which is. something like M2 is worth more and is sente.
> i think this is an empty threat.
Here I have sente and I don't know what the biggest move is.
What is the right response to white R15, I end up losing an attachment.  > look at the variations. i think the first one is best. in any case, there were several moves where you still had a chance.
> even at this point you had a chance, since the S10 stone is vulnarable. see variations.
> empty triangle!
Jon:  This approach strikes me as odd.  Because white's stone at A is as close as it is, I'd be worried about black digging underneath white's stones to overconcentrate them (e.g. an attachment underneath at B).  What should white do instead?
Jon:  Good!  Digging underneath with this attachment will strengthen black's corner while reducing white's base on the top considerably.
Jon:  Responding with the usual hane feels a bit dubious to me, like following joseki blindly.  Once black strengthens his stone by drawing back to A, white's three stones will be under pressure from black on both sides.  White must try to find a better alternative if he can.  Can you find a possible alternative for white?
Jon:  Oof!  Strengthening these white stones is necessary, but they're clearly overconcentrated now.
this seemed overconcentrated for w.  Jon:  You're absolutely right, white is overconcentrated and under pressure from both sides.  Because of that, he also can't worry about making the invasion at A yet, he's just too weak.
Jon:  A good choice, black wanted this move too to create a framework based on the top right enclosure, so white taking this move first prevents that and limits black's potential for development along the right side.
Ok, I noticed in the game that this is bad.  Jon:  Yeah, when you're trying to approach a corner that already has an extra stone nearby, most likely you'll have to use a more careful approach in order to avoid any trouble.
black does not have a good answer, at least I did not find one.  Jon:  Once white pincers, it's tough to find a good way to get out of this since white has the stone at A.
Jon:  Moving out the pincered stone is the right idea, but because black still has an opportunity to counterattack the marked white stone, I'd prefer to move out slightly more slowly with the one point jump at A since the two point jump has much weaker connectivity.
Jon:  This was one of the losing moves for black.  Trying to approach the bottom left corner is too early at the moment for two reasons:  1.)  Black still has to save his two marked stones on the bottom right.  Starting a second invasion without settling the first one is very dangerous.  2.)  The white pincer stone at A isn't settled yet.  Since there's a lot of room for it to make a base along the bottom, white can settle while pincering black's approach move by playing B, which would be ideal for him.  Black needs to prevent that by pincering the stone directly.
Jon:  A good move, now the white stone at A is settled and black has two separate weak groups.
bad again?!  Jon:   Locally, black has no choice but to take the corner, he can't afford to run away with the stone at A.  In terms of the overall picture though, the result will be bad for black.
Jon:  Black established himself safely in the bottom left corner, but the left side is now flat and white was given a nice amount of territory on the bottom.  Also note that black's two marked stones are still unsettled and vulnerable to attack.
Jon:  Because black still has an escape route, it's better to run away with the kosumi at A than try to live small unless you absolutely have to.
The game looked so bad, so a tried to pick a fight, but that backfired. Wat is b sopposed to do here?  Jon:  Picking a fight is reasonable, but not just yet since you still have the escape route.  I'd move out with the kosumi at A first to get out of the bottom right, then you can worry about white's developing framework on the bottom.
Jon:  Locally, this isn't a bad idea, but if you want to play this, it would be better to omit the 1-2 exchange and play this right away since that exchange helped white strengthen.
Jon:  I'd prefer to connect at A, as taking the stone right away allows white to cover up that hole by making the atari at A himself.
I missed, that b is not even alive after s9 here.  Jon:  It's not *too* big a problem for black, but white S-9 will allow white to get some territory with an extension to R-13 after black fixes his weakness.
Jon:  This is a critical point for both sides.  White is now expanding his framework while pressing black's left side down, so it's a good move, but it makes things tough for black.
Jon:  Because white's framework is getting pretty big, I don't think black has the time to defend here, so he must work on something else instead.  What's a more important area for black to work on?
Jon:  A horribly passive move.  White shouldn't try to tightly secure the territory in his framework yet.  Placing stones inside it unnecessarily limits its potential for expansion considerably, but because the framework still isn't totally secure with one move alone, this stone is very awkwardly placed.  What's a better way for white to build his framework on the bottom?
Jon:  This reduction has the right idea, but it's a bit early (and deep).  I'd like to attack the marked white stones on the top with A first to build a little more strength before doing it.
Jon:  Allowing black to connect is very passive, white must follow through and cut the black stones apart.
Jon:  Defending this way is kind of awkward in terms of shape, so I'd prefer to turn more simply with A.
Jon:  Good!  Black is starting to build a nice amount of potential territory on the left side.
Jon:  Pressing down here has the right idea, but because white's marked stones aren't stable yet, white can't afford to play a longer (thinner) move like this.  It'd be much safer to jump down more carefully with a two point jump at A.
Jon:  Good!  Black must take advantage of the thin connectivity and separate white's stones.
Jon:  White's playing too risky here by starting a second separate group.  He should worry about his top group first and hane at A.  Locally, it'd be better for white to counteratari at B, which will give him better access to the center.
Jon:  Too early!  Black doesn't have the strength to start another reduction yet, so he should work on something else first.    What should black work on instead?
Jon:  It's too early to make this exchange since black has the refutation at A.  So white should worry about attacking the stone at B.  What's the best way for white to attack the stone at B?
Jon:  Because black's stone at A above isn't stable yet, digging deeper into the bottom is too dangerous, you have to strengthen the stone at A first.  What's a good way to strengthen the stone at A?
Jon:  Because black can't escape, it's better to save what you can by pushing out with A and giving up the bottom stones.
Jon:  Trying to cut is a bit of an overplay, so it's better to atari from the other side (at A).  It's very hard to save the marked black stones anyway, but by forcing white to extend to A, white is gaining more strength in the center, which will make it slightly easier for his weak groups to escape.  Please skip to move 117 for the final comments and closing summary.
this move is clearly a miss. I thought it is sente against the s8 group, bu this one can defend in sente.  here my question: is there any way black can still continue the game and get chances if he plays something else than o8 or is the game lost anyway?  Thanks for  analysing.  Jon:  Yeah, the white S-8 group won't have any trouble defending.  As for your question, I would still continue the game if I were black.  The position isn't great, black's behind by roughly 10-15 points, but he has one last chance to turn it around, and that lies in attacking the three marked white groups. None of these groups are in great shape, so that's where your opportunity lies.  The only thing you have to watch out for is the marked black stones in the center.  They're not totally settled yet, so you'd have to be careful not to let them fall into any danger during the attack.  Instead of O-8, I would start the attack by making the hane at E-13 (A).  Putting pressure on the left side group will isolate it from the top group while reaching out to the marked black stones in the center.    Here are the most important points for this game:  Opening:  1.)  When approaching a corner that has extra stones nearby it, more aggressive approaches like the small knight's approach or one point approach may be too dangerous to use.  This is when more gentle approaches like the large knight's approach are useful, as they're harder to pincer/attack and will have an easier time making a base or escaping if they need to.  2.)  Moves 19 (black F-3) and white's response at move 20 (white J-3) played a critical part in the opening.  These kinds of situations come up a lot where an approach move may allow a weak enemy stone further down the side to establish itself while pincering that approach move.  If possible, you want to avoid giving your opponent an opportunity to settle like this and prevent it from happening altogether, whether by pincering the enemy stone directly or some other way.  Midgame:  1.)  You prepared the attack on white's two weak groups (top and left side) nicely, but these attacking opportunities were damaged by the overaggressive reduction at move 67 (black L-7).  Before making a reduction/invasion, make sure that you not only have the strength to safely do it, but also make sure it won't damage your other stones on the board or help your opponent's weak stones.  The same applies for when you're considering digging deeper into an area (e.g. black L-4 at move 71).  Before you do it, make sure you can get out safely.  Thank you very much for allowing me to review your game!  I hope you found my commentary helpful, and if you have any questions, please feel free to contact me.  ---  End of commentary.  Remaining moves omitted, white wins by resignation.
I would prefer attacking with "A" (or one space to the right), but this is certainly possible. "A" puts more pressure on black's komoku and can help make the game more complex, which is a way to overcome the handicap.
"Never touch weak stones." This is because your opponent becomes strong in the process. "A" would be a better play, or a pincer, like "B", could also work.
Compared to variation "A", black's group has better potential, compared to "B", white has less influence.
R9 more ballanced maybe? I felt uncomfortable to let duoble extension  from the upper right shimari.  This is much too close to black's thickness. I cannot imagine why black did not follow up with "A" . Surely you can see the pain of making a two-point extension to "B"? Black's thickness would have caused white a lot of trouble.  It's important to realize that though black is leading, you can't try to take the territory that is rightfully his.
This seems too slow. Jumping to "A" is better.
R5 or even tenuki would be better i fear.  What do you say?  This move is much better than R5. Sure, it may seem like a play on the third line is stronger, but it would leave black with the option of playing S3 and you would lose the chance to play R2, a large endgame move (about 5 point sente move, follow-up gote sequence of another 5 points).  I would tenuki now to reduce black's left side. This is certainly too early to play now, but it is nonetheless a very good move later on.
I thought such a huge moyo is not tolerable. :) Shoulder hit was choosen, i had no better idea. What options can be considered to invade/reduce this moyo? This is normally a good choice, but because of black's strength on the top-left, I would consider "A" instead. It's not as severe, but white is safer.  The reason I wouldn't play the shoulder hit because of the location of black's marked stones. C10 prevents sabaki on the side and black's 5th and 6th line stones (E15 and F6) make this move feel more like an invasion than a reuction, no?
The exchange of white 45 and where black should have played is bad for white. Simply jumping to "A" is best.
White's shape has become heavy. When invading/reducing, white should play lightly - not be afraid to sacrifice a stone or two for the reduction/invasion to work better.
I wanted to keep weak black group to remain weak. However to  save *my* weak group seems to be better strategy now. What do  you think?  I agree. Black 52 was too painful to deal with. "A" is better - it's best to keep with the fundametals.
Perhaps A would be a way for white to escape, though black will gain influence/territory for attacking such a weak group.
It is important for white to let his large group escape to the center. These stones have no strategical purpose, they just give black great influence.
C7 would be better isnt it? Anyway Its hard to win now. :(  I would agree, with both points.
The last couple moves removed ko threats for white and filled up liberties. They should not be played.  These moves are called aji-keshi (moves that unnecessarily remove possibilities in a position that are good for you).
As pitiful as it is, "A" should be played.
This move is too idealistic. White cannot hope to seperate black inside his sphere of influence
White should secure his weak group before creating another.   Because white has two weak groups and black has more influence,  white cannot hope to save both groups.
Sine both black groups are clearly alive, this move is not necessary.  I would instead connect white's groups.
WHite gains nothing with this move, it only allows for black  to attack again.
Best chance for white is at "A", but white has no chance of winning this game.
:-))
omgilost [?]: hey gg
randyg [15k?]: hi thx u2
Mattias> Black usually plays A or B because a stone at 3-4 needs enclosure and such a move is very big.
Mattias> I would play like A in this situation.
Mattias> Now you are cut off and lost the whole corner.
Mattias> What is the reason behind this move? It does not attack anything or build territory. Any of A-D are much better.
Mattias> So far you have forced the opponent to build territory without making any of your own. Mattias> It looks like you maybe are trying to encircle the center but that is not a good idea. It is very hard to make territory in the center so you should never aim at getting anything there. Try to build territory in the corners and the sides. Then you have the center in mind in the aspect that you try to always have some access there so you can make sure that your opponent won't get any territory there either. You will only get territory in the center if your opponent make mistakes
Mattias> Here I show you a couple of possible sequences.
Mattias> This is a little slow and too close to your two stones above.
Mattias> You jump in too deep.
Mattias> Atari from the wrong way.
Mattias> While you try to save the white stones that are captured you are losing more stones and you let black destroy the moyo you got in the top towards the center. Wrong direction of play.  Mattias> Some big points left to play are the marked points.
Mattias> You should give up those stones. Instead you can use the stones later by threatening to connect from the outside.
Mattias> The rest of the game looks like you are out of time and do desperate moves so I end the review here.
randyg [15k?]: i just cant get this game no matter how much I play!!
omgilost [?]: umm ur pretty good u should be at least 7k
omgilost [?]: u messed up tryin to control the center this game..
randyg [15k?]: I feel like I never control Anything!
omgilost [?]: rite now ur right and top is solid omgilost [?]: but ut middle is mostly mine now especially now
omgilost [?]: umm u shouldn't do little moves lik dat focus on saving dat group
randyg [15k?]: isnt it already dead? omgilost [?]: now it is
H.: When deciding about kakari, consider kakari against 3-4, 3-5 and 4-5 points as more urgent than kakari against 3-3 and 4-4. 4-4 is best left alone for a while, because it takes 3 stones to really secure the territory from there, so you're not in a hurry to prevent secure territory there now. 3-3 is already stable, so there's nothing to prevent. Furthermore it has not much influence, so you don't need to hurry erasing development potential. 3-4, 3-5 and 4-5 all threaten a shimari, so it's more urgent to approach them.  Here black has two points to kakari. Kakariing C16 is correct, because that stone extends from Q17. Try to make your stones work together right from the start!
H.: Black plays chinese opening pattern instead (never seen it before with a white stone at c4), so white should prevent a double wing framework. Best would be to play around the upper middle, because the area there is already more stable. Problem: C16 points to the bottom, not to the right. If white doesnt play there, black might kakari that stone next, which would make an even better extension than before, extending from right side influence.
H.: This is congruent with the idea of the urgency of shimari or kakari around 3-4 points, but white looks low on the left, just waiting for black to get advantage in influence.
BB: Is this a good approach?  I still have no real understanding of how to decide what kinds of moves to make in the opening.  H.: Looks very good to me.
H.: Both players have taken the big points so far, and on first glance it seems even. But in my feeling black is a bit better, because white is so low on the left side.
BB: I was pretty optimistic at this point.  Was I justified in that?  At this stage I had no real plan for what to do next.  I hoped to let my opponent attack me and try to solidify my territory in respond.  H.: Looks like a possible strategy to me, since chinese opening aims for building a moyo.
H.: Now it is important to stick to your strategy. Moyos are not territory, moyos are attacking formations, areas where you want to fight advantageous (and if you can, kill).  So what you don't want to do is making life easy for him. Don't let him just live in the corner! Force him to get a weakish group! If white is put on the run, tengen will become very useful.
BB: Again, I'm not sure if this response is good or not.  My idea was to build up thickness along the top where I already have some stones sketching out territory.  H.: As soon as this white stone is settled, white can start his next reduction from the outside. Don't make life easy for him. (See variation!)
H.: Of course confining white is good, but ... eventually you will have to rely on turning a lot of this moyo into actual territory to counter white's two shimaris. It's always bad when you have to rely on a large moyo becoming territory completely, because it's not what a moyo is made for (that's why it is called moyo, not territory).  My variation may not look as large as this on first glance, but every weak group the enemy has will give you the initiative for a long time. That's more valuable in this case I think. In other cases it may be the opposite, when the moyo is a bit wider, but L16 and R11 seem to be too close to your wall - overconcentrated!  Plus: Look at your formation, you have just one large area. That is said to be not a good idea, to rely on only one large territory. If it is successfully invaded, then the game is over, because you have no other areas to take profit after your attack. (And this is exactly what is going to happen, right?)  You should try to keep the game flexible. If you settle too fast and too easily, then you may become defensive for the rest of the game, because you get obliged to defend what you invested so many stones in. Also in this way attacking the kakari stone by taking its base seems to be better.
BB: In retrospect this seems pointless.  What should I do instead?  Something like A?  Or just pop out at B?  H.: I like the direction. You press his position flat on the side, while you expand the right side moyo - your chief asset. Problem: The exact position allows white to push through and cut you off.
H.: Pointless now. This is endgame. I think, pushing through your gap was better.
H.: Yes, try to save face!
BB: I saw it didn't look good for my two stones near M4.  Is this move just stupid?  Should I ignore those two stones and invade at A or some such thing?  H.: You have to follow the strategy which you chose, not abandon it in the middle. You played N6, so now, after his push, you can't just let him walk in further. If this was your plan, it would have been better not to play N6 at all. You can't let the opponent have all good points.  And if you want to play next to an ogeima shimari, B is a good point, because it creates corner invasion potential (starting with C3).  Invading at A is out of the question. Principle: Only invade if absolutely necessary, because invading almost always creates a weak group for you. Imagine white hunting that group out and walking along with it in your precious moyo!  C6 and C13 are low (3rd line), so even if white gets to play something like D10 he will have only about 10 points in this area. Furthermore, you will still be able to hack into it later, if you want to.
H.: This whole action has helped him to solidify and extend the left side.  So what was your plan putting a group here? You gave white solid territory on the left, so you must get something out of it. If you planned to attack the bottom center, you should follow suit. The group around F5 itself is without value, having no influence, not clearly two eyes yet since white can choose a good moment to play G5, and only 3 points of territory up to now.
H.: Attack over. Now what does your group in the bottom left do except standing there, small, bulky, compressed?
H.: Good, you were able to still get the point, aiming for a large center territory.
H.: This stone was no danger. Furthermore your move has no effect on white, so he should just tenuki and play a large reduction.
H.: Good for black, no aji left in this area.
H.: Pointless at this moment. Black is not even half confined, escape to tengen at hand.
H.: maybe L7 bigger, or something around the upper left, which you play later. This move should be at least one point higher (play the largest move that still ensures connection).
H.: So white comes in, but too deep. He'll have a hard fight, which will most likely lead to his death. A is the typical move now, blocking the escape route and making it tight for white at the same time.
H.: This leaves white leeway. He should try to expand and live now, as quickly as possible, inside your moyo. If he gets reasonably large and survives, you probably lose. So the cap was better I think. Your move of choice would have been good earlier, for moyo building intentions, but now is the time to attack fiercely.
H.: I know, a weak point like this cries for being exploited. But don't do it automatically!
H.: This sequences were great for black. Left side broken up, corner confined, and stones safely connected. Oh yes, and K13 is still looking terrified.
H.: Here of course splitting this shape was very good!
H.: Good! All important aims accomplished. Upper left safe, bottom left alive, K13 cut off. With a good endgame you should win now.
H.: Pointless: you are already alive.
BB: This is exactly the kind of invasion I never know how to deal with.  Am I wrong in thinking I shoud be able to kill it?  How should evaluate this position?  H.: In cases like this, where the aim is not attacking but killing (you are right: you really should kill this stone!), you should apply the following principles, which I once heard a dan player say as the most natural thing imaginable:  1.) Surround 2.) Limit 3.) Kill  The question: how to actually do this?
H.: Your move is normal, just walling white in. Even if he lives, he lives small. The problem: I think, you can't allow him to live even small. You need your territory here. (See variation now!)
H.: Surrounded he is nevertheless, and since you are so strong in the area, you should attack his shape, not allowing him eyes (see variation).
H.: He tries to make shape. Still, maybe R8 is good.
BB: A bad idea?  Should I just play A to close off a big area?  H.: Principle: Don't touch the prey! By touching weak stones, they get stronger. Try to make him heavy instead by peeping, then keep him from getting eyes!
H.: This is - considering the tight spot that he is in - comfortable shape. Too easy on white!
H.: Hmm ... solid, but not very efficient (empty triangle).
H.: When a stone touches you it is no good idea to ignore that. Either you hane, or - when the cut is dangerous - you extend.
H.: Now his shape has become much too good, because you couldn't make him heavy.  Best is to confine enemy stones early, so that even if they live, they live small. But in this game, if you don't kill him, you can't win, so you needed to make him heavy and let him die, like in the earlier variations.
H.: If you let your stone get cut off, the attempt to erase the eye becomes meaningless. You even help him.
H.: Now white's 50% alive.
BB: White has pushed into my territory big time.  How should I have stopped him earlier?  H.: The problem was that you didn't keep him eyeless, otherwise it wouldn't help him to be here, all dead now, in the middle of your strong stones. If your intention was to prevent him getting here at all, you should have blocked him just early, risking he lives in the bottom right.   But as stated above, that would have meant defeat. You had to kill.
H.: As he gets it, the fight is over now. White lives.
BB: The rest is mostly endgame stuff that I didn't feel too strongly about one way or another.  Thanks for your comments.  H.: Okay, then my conclusion comes now. Let's collect what we learned.  1.: A moyo is not territory, it's an attacking formation. Don't put yourself into a situation where you have to rely on a moyo becoming all your territory! 2.: When you have the chance to make an enemy group weak, use it! 3.: Don't invade without a very good reason, because getting a weak group is bad! 4.: Know your potential and stick to your strategy to make that potential come to live (for example don't let white split you in bottom right, attack the bottom center when you got the chance). 5.: Attacking a group usually means trying to surround it, keeping it weak (without definite eyespace) while building solid outside influence, and if possible, kill the surrounded group later. Attacking is ~not~ touching enemy stones! That is rather helping him! If you have to kill (and have prospects to do so, because you have influence around), concentrate on keeping him without eyes while staying connected yourself. Don't let him escape your moyo of course!  I want to give you some recommendations for further studying.  1.) Ikuro Ishigure: "In the Beginning". Very good book about fuseki and some early middle game strategy. 2.) Richard Bozulich: "One Thousand and One Life-and-Death Problems". This is where you get the reading strength to actually kill if you have to, or to handle other complicated tactics stuff. Reading is the muscle or good condition of go, so be sure to practice it! 3.) Richard Bozulich: "Get Strong at Attacking". Problems where you can practice attacking strategy. 4.) Michael Redmond: "ABC's of Attack and Defence". He concentrates on fighting principles while showing really many useful examples and variations.  I hope this review was helpful to you. Good luck in your future games!
(al) I would try also move at e8. It may lead to complicated fights, but this move make black low.
(al) I think it's mistake for black to answer this way. r4 will be much more intresting and bad for white.  Therefore it's may be better to invade on s4 or r4.
(al) I think in this position white move should be at q7. It threaten p6, and make group stronger. And after that it's possible to invade r14.  Also, it's better not to make the knight move, it's better just to jump to the center at p10.  At this move you finish at gote and black defend their territory. It you will jump and black will jump, you will have sente to move to n17.
(al) this is very dangerous move, because black can divide white in 2 groups. Better to connect below, at j3.
(al) try also variation with g7.
(al) It's too deep. Normally, invasion is made on the line that connects highers opponents stones -- it's f15 and j8. Safest way to invade is on the marked line.
(al) too deep. You should run out.
(al) and i think even in this stage there is a possibility to save white stones on the left. You should leave useless stones on the bottom and run.
(al) what do you want to do by this move? You just made black stronger.
(al) A is better. Also at this moment B and C possible.
(al) A is better.
(al) lost oppotunity in yose.
Daedin: I made some research afterwards, and it seems this move is one tempo early, since the joseki is as shown in the first variation.
Daedin: Black's position is indeed far less thicker that with the usual joseki. But instead of Black D16, could he play at R14 to "catch up" with the usual joseki ?
Jahz: probably not good, W has only one side, but what to do else ?
Daedin: According to Kogo's Joseki Dictionary, this pincer is rather played when Black has a san-rei-sei at the bottom, and then White enters the corner at C3.
Daedin: After the game we both felt that this may not have been a very good move, since it is rather played when the Black stone is at D9.
Daedin: This may be a little early.
This is good for Black
Daedin: Here I wanted to build a wall on the right, but did not consider the simple and obvious answer at Q12.  Jahz: this is not so obvious, as W is then cut
since B has used the aji at R14, R18 is now a sente move for B.
Daedin: This may not be the right time, and keeping the pressure on the weak Q12 group might be better.  Jahz: i agree, i was suprised by this move
Jahz: maybe too slow
Daedin: Letting White take the stone is huge, because his group is now pretty much safe.  Yes.
Jahz: W happy with this result
Daedin: This feels too vague, and that was what I felt at the time too. However I did not find any god move to attack White's group (it looks alive) and did not want White to reduce easily around L16.
Jahz: i feel behind so i invade, but that's no so good because it's obvious i'll end gote, and B will be able to close the top. Maybe i should try to reduce in sente at top, reinforcing my central group in the same time, then invade.
Daedin: Same feeling for this move as for K13 - it does not build very much to my mind.
Daedin: Maybe Black should have played more aggressively here.
Now white has two ways to go home, and his road is wide
This is not really needed
Daedin: This is maybe too timid.
....
B may change his mind and A13...
Jahz: this one seems a joke as W can easily kill, maybe there is an error in this SGF, or we were blind during the game :)
end? i think the game is still close
I've never known any particularly good responses to this kakari against the low chinese. I think the one I played worked decently, though I also considered plays such as R4 and R5.   ** Your play looks good to me.
** This seems like an awkward shape for you.  It remains awkward through most of the game.
** Your shape here is still not good.  After white gets strong, you end up playing N3 to help "fix it", and then end up needing to play O6 to fix it again  Try to find other non-contact plays to pressure white.  In the end, I don't think P5 accomplished much of anything.
** should white save those two stones?  If yes, good play, if not, you'll likely lose your two black stones on the side (or get them endangered)
** Consider R8 instead...  Stealing white's base and building your won.
I felt that I needed to play on top in response to this, but at the same time I didn't want to leave my side group so vulnerable. Thoughts on this, or ideas?  ** I think supporting the side group is more urgent than the corner.  That said, there may be a few moves you can do in sente that can support either group (marked points).  If you use one, to support one group, I'd recommend the next move to support the other.  S16 may be the best
This play may have been a little overzealous..  ** Yes, it's an overplay :(
** I'm starting to get very uncomfortable with your position.  I don't yet feel like the right side is secure, the upper right corner is weak, you have two floating stones, and are potentially starting a new group.  A pincer of E17 *will* hurt.  The lower right seems to be massively in your favor, especially with another stone down there... both to threaten full enclosure of white and to stop a counter attack against your right stones.  On the right, I like P10.  Also, L17 is looks like enough of a threat against the 3 white stones, but also helping to ensure the death of your corner (already likely)
I don't know any joseki that involve E6 here, so I went back to the needy corner. :S  ** I don't either, E6 feels atypical.  You don't really need to fear it, but it is setting up the left side to be big.
This play troubled me, so I decided to again leave the corner alone until I had a better plan.
** eek!  P10 is sente.  See variations
I felt safe on the right at this point, but only because I made a reading error... white capitalizes.
Ko fight anyone? I think white's response ought to have been S6, but I at least appreciated the bait being taken.   ** Umm... no.  It's a ko fight for a false eye.  White should S4
This, I think, is the only reason I came out ok. The response gave me a good position.
I'm not sure why white kept switching plans on me..  ** You're lucky they didn't continue in the upper left
I didn't even think about M8 when I played this.
** Too small.  White has some majore moyos starting.  A play in the middle of the left side is very big.  White's 5th line stones won't help stop your invasion... The E6 stone you didn't know how to handle won't end up being all that useful for white.
** Probably still too small
I have mixed feelings about this response. Is there a better one?  ** You have some vulnerability (see variation).  A move like F8 may be timely, but K8 is probably the correct immediate response
First mistaek?  [krinid] This is too small.  You need to address the potential huge moyo white is making on the bottom half of the board.  You need to break up his groups similar to what white has done to black with k16.  It's too early to say what's best, but I've added a few possibilities.
[krinid] This hurts.  White is sealing off a large moyo in the bottom half here in exchange for a much smaller black moyo in the Q14 area.
[krinid] This is good, but overdue.  A venture into white's moyo.    However, white so much white already present, white doesn't even have to kill the black group, but just create a wall up the G, H or J columns forcing black to live on the left side or connect to the upper left, and then white can extend the influence up to the top middle and top side to gain back what was lost from the d8 invasion.  Of course, killing the black invasion is also an excellent play, but more risky.
[krinid] Too reserved for white.
[krinid] Again, too reserved - white must keep this territory.
What to do
[krinid] It's too late to invade - there's nowhere to live anymore.
Since that point I probably definitly lost  the game. White's moyo becames too large.  Is there any way to chang that result. ?  [krinid] From this point on, it will take a mistake on the part of white.
[krinid] This white group shouldn't have lived.  With all the black stones around in the corner, you should have played to keep your stones connected, rather than play a hane and give white a chance to attack and make eyes.
[krinid] This was a mistake.  Because the L15 group is cut off from the center, this group should die.
[krinid] This is obviously a desperate search for a mistake on white's part.  There's no way a black group can live in this area without a mistake from white which lets P9 or Q5 die.
To quote from (the free online) Kogo's joseki dictionary, "This is bad, unless W already has a stone on one of the triangled spots."  After B G17, he "has no move to secure an efficient amount of territory.  If he'd like to make a light moyo with a wide extension, W C16 would be much better shape."
I think I would consider some other moves first
This doesn't sem to gain much, especially compared to other available moves
This sequence just seems to solidify B with little gain for yourself
This is a big move, but you make sure you weigh this in comparison to building up your moyo.
This move just costs a liberty
Remember that your goal is to harrass the dragon while solidifying your moyo.  Be cautious of trying so hard to kill.
note B stone causght in ladder
dip: tenuki as i fear to end in gote and let W in another corner  Jesse: Good idea. I would have done the same.
Jesse: I didn't know it, but it seems this is joseki. There's an interesting discussion to this on  http://senseis.xmp.net/?BQM209   I've also given the standard moves as a variation.
These moves seem a little strange to me. You might be giving up R7 too easily (see variations to move 10).
dip: letting R7 as a sleeper, sacrificing it  Jesse: Certainly now you can't do much there.
Jesse: I'm not sure if it's really a mistake, but as White I might have played M16. Letting my stones work together.
Jesse: A strong cut, but in the end perhaps it helps White...
Jesse: Now we see that White responded well to the cut at L15.
Jesse: That was a nice sequence for Black in the corner.
Jesse: White is about to get too much influence in the center. Black mustn't let this happen. Perhaps L4 is better. Attacking J4, threatening to connect and looking towards the center.  I'm not at all an expert in these things, but the variation I've given might be much better.
Jesse: We can see this is much too nice for White.
Jesse: Black should see that White can cut. D14 might be better. See variation.
Jesse: What's happening to C15 reminds me of what happened to R7. It's good to learn how to sacrifice, but also how to take care of your stones.  This move loses sente.
Jesse: I tried a couple of variations seeing what would happen if black played G18 instead of K17, and kept the one with best play (as "best" as I can see it). Though it isn't at all better for Black.  So Black has defended well. Seki.
dip: i should have blocked the invasion before, but when? I had two groups to save in upper side!  Jesse: Maybe instead of R4 or instead of F16.
Jesse: This move lets White escape along the side (see variation).
Jesse: Watch out for empty triangles. There's almost always a better move (C7, C8 or tenuki for example).
Jesse: B4 doesn't help matters much.
Jesse: If you want to give up B7, you could do it with D7 as well (see variation), Have more influence in the center and avoid the problems you run into later.
Jesse: Not a bad move for the left side, but White-E6 is dangerous.
Jesse: Again we see a black stone behind a row of three White stones. Perhaps the variation would have been better.
Jesse: That was a nice sequence for Black, though the last move (G10) could be more forceful (G9, H9, bold souls might even go as far as tengen - Black needs to do something about the center).
dip: G7 was surely a kind of overplay, and following moves confirm that it was a bad idea. But in my opinion at this point B is behind a lot, so it should do something. maybe H7 would work better.  Jesse: I can't always see too far, but it looks like H7 (see variations) isn't too good for black either. Maybe J8, K8, K9...
Jesse: O12 would also work nicely.
Jesse: A fairly big gote-sente move (white has A9 to look forward to).
Jesse: Exactly.
Jesse: Nice peep.
Jesse: This is a rather small gote move which is then abandonned to start another gote sequence. Remember the end game rule of thumb (first big sente then big gote then small sente then small gote). There are still big gote moves (D5) and many sente moves on the board for black (A8, H19, P17, H12, P5, M5, T6 etc.) play these first. If Black can play these one after the other (of course assuming that white doesn't find anything bigger), That can make several points of difference in the end game.
Jesse: ?
Jesse: That would have been a good gote move for Black.
Jesse: ?
Jesse: Even if Black cut, White could live (see variation).
Jesse: Again rather than empty triangles, look for something else (H13?)
Jesse: ?
Jesse: ?
Hi Brett,  It was a pleasure reviewing your game and I enjoyed doing it.  In general there are three things that really stick out in your game that need improvement.  - the direction of play  - Sente - overplay  More specific remarks are below in the file.  Regarding B. There was more sense of direction in your play and you definitely dominated the game through a better use of sente and much less overplay.   For both B and W goes to try to find the biggest move. Ask yourself questions like; what if my opponent would play here ? Does my opponent need to respond ? What happens if he doesn't ?Is this move necessary for me ? What if I omit it ? etc.  If you have any questions feel free to contact me.  Good luck! Lothar.
W D16 is too slow B will close at least one corner so normally the Shusaku opening is answered with W P4 or P3.
B should simply play P3 or P4
[w]here black invaded before I could make my favorite formation, so I reacted in as safely as i could.  In retrospect maybe a pincer would've been better?  Better here is F3 (preventing B H3 -> open skirt) or indeed pincer which would make a nice extension from D16.
[w]here is my attempt at grabbing a big point and setting up a familiar formation (still thinking handicap/san-ran-sei)  Forget the sanren-sei if B C6 didn't already ruin it B D9 did so completely.  The biggesty point on the board is simply Q/R15 and P3/4. Corners first!
Mistake no need to invade there are bigger moves to play.
[w]just what i wanted here
Because of B D9 you may want to descend to3rd row to prevent B C12 wich would make a perfect extension from D9 and attack white in sente.
B in trouble
[w]with this i hoped to overconcentrate the black stones, but i think i just made myself heavy.  No this is good B has no space to make 2 eyes and must jump out into the center.
ouch exactly what I feared. However it's a bit premature because of B's weak F17 group. W should punish with F14. See var.
This is a very slow move from B. B should play F14. W should profit.
It is sente but the action is somewhere else.. W should cap B at G13.
This is wrong. W can play a double hane at E11 and either seriouosly threaten B's F17 group or take profit on the left side. See var.
B should obviously play E11 and push back.
[w]wrong side, but i was hoping for what happened next.  also, i preferred black to live on the third line instead of the fourth.   See var.  Wrong side ? Absolutely not! However you had unfinished business regarding B's very weak group at F17!
Prefer B O16. See var.
[w]this was just the result i hoped for... a little influence to build with  Play N15 instead of O16, seal B in and connect to K17.
Nice move by B!
[w]i think i should've jumped out from my new wall here, putting a stone where black would like to have one for a nice moyo shape.  I realized that about 5 seconds after I played k4.  too late :)  The biggest point on the  board is an extension from B's large (ogeima) shimari . W should thus play exactly where B wants play.
there's only one move here and that's R10/Q10.
I understand that your trying to defend your corner territory, but I just don't like G3 because you allow B to split you up. Besides territory should be obtained while attacking your opponent..  In the variation you will see another way of thinking where B will take some territory but W will build a powerful wall .
very strange move by B may be a missclick ? Should have been H4.
[w]I went for the hane instead of protecting the monkey jump... i think it was a mistake in retrospect.  no it's correct you can prevent B from splitting you up. B should worry about connecting his 2 heavy stones to O3.
W can respond with W K2. Work it our yourself.
Good idea. R9 would have been perfect. See var.
B should still extend from the shimari to Q8.
[w]i was still thinking moyo here... make a box while attacking the q12 stone.  but i just provoked it to make life  The problem start with Q10 on the 4th line. B R4 is on the 3rd so it would have been more logical to also play on the 3rd line. Instead of N10 R7 would have been good.   You also have two weak groups at the top that you need to take in consideration before you play N10.
[w]here's where the 'fun' starts (maybe it started already?)  This I don't understand. Why attack B Q12 and then let him get away with R10? The only move her would be W R9.
There B goes..
Good idea but it's not sente. See the var. How to keep sente and instead of making a single move, making a sequence of moves. It's like making sentences instead of uttering single words.
B is in trouble here and could lose both groups.
There's a solution see var.
The corner group has bigger problems. So first B S18.
Good move.
[w]open triangle, i know... but if i had laddered there would be a cutting point at l17 which bothered me for some reason.  any suggestions?  It's an ugly thing an empty triangle but here it does the job. However as you pointed out in your own var. W L15 would have prevented B group N18 to connect to B group J17 at least without having to deal with the Ko. But that would have required some more reading.
Overplay. The right sequence is in the var.
Here you still could have played K19 and make B sweat in a Ko fight.
[w]couldn't think fast enough to see a way out of this  B get's away without having to play the Ko.
This is not the way to prevent B from entering your moyo. see var for a more effective way.
There's a better way of getting in. B O13. W didn't play the double hane but it was there. See var.
W can play the double hane. see var.
[w]ugh this was right where it counts.... but i suppose it's too early to think about center territory anyway anyway, right?  Not really. After all it's all about the points and you just lost about 20.  see the var. how to handle situations like this.
[w]trying to find a way to reduce and build something at the same time... are these all too far apart to be useful at all?  Attack and build that's the idea and O5 doesn't really attacks so B tenuki's and goes in to the center.  On the other hand B has 3 ways to get into the center so defending it will not be possible. W is suffering from the mistakes in the opening and middle game.
Good move.
Good move from W.
This is a mistake by B. W can cut and take profit. B should clamp. See var.
That's a bit too easy on B. Try O2 instead, see vars.
G2 was bigger, as you will see.
Good move. But more an endgame move take a look at the var.
That's not the way to deal with the monkey jump. See var.  Better however is to tenuki and play W A7.
B is not taking maximum profit here see var.
See var.
W doesn't respond so now B should play M5
Way too small and no sente. Look at W S15, S5 M12, E6 or  F10.
B should tenuki. See var.
You do try to make territoy here but if you do it like this then B will play F7 and expand his own teriitory while decreasing yours, and that's exactly what you should do. So not W K7 but W E7 which also threatens W C7.
This is a typical thank you move. W will connect and says thanks!
[w]I think i have trouble giving up stones, in retrospect g9 is much bigger  Especially because B needs to make another move in order to ecrually capture P11 and Q10. See var.
Better F6.
[w]by this point i'm completely lost, just trying to make reductions and build anything that will hold a few points... thinking at this point i'm fairly well behind, since the center is slowly becoming dame and the bottom right is too big.  There are still pleanty of points on the board.   They idea is good you attack and try to build.
See var for better shape.
First things first. B M5 See var.
too nice.
Mistake from B. W should punish with D5.
You have to take a closer look at these kind of moves.   - not sente  - doesn't take territory - doesn't prevent B from taking territory  So B can ignore this move.
B tenuki's and does prevent w from taking territory. However it's not sente. Probably the biggest move on the board right now is B A13 (or W B11).
Again, what do you want to achieve with this move ?  In the endgame most of the points are on the edge of the board not in the center. See var.  Regarding sente count from here how many consecutive moves B makes.
Too small and W punishes B.
Big move! And you decided not to respond to B's threat of taking 2 stones but found a bigger move where B had to respond.
Why not take 4 points at E7 in sente? Or see var.
Another example of a move that doesn't do anything.
[w]i'm not sure when this corner evaporated, but it was probably witht he monkey jump.  if i had blocked it, the game would've been a stomachable loss at least :)  At this moment, because of W B11 etc., you're a bit ahead. The game was decided in the endgame although W had many opportunities to take a more solid lead.
B is trying to split 2 groups that are alive.
Yes!
not sente and no profit.
[w]worthless
[w]as you can see i'm basically just following my opponent around the board now  Yes, quite unfortunate because there are still some big points in sente to be made at the right edge of the board.  This is where you lose the game. Up to here you were still a few points ahead and with the few big moves that were there you could have sealed the game.
B has hypnotised W.
Yes! biggest move on the board.
Moves like these are just waisting Ko threats.
W is too far behind but B should have been more careful see var.
B makes a mistake here and should have played S10.
This is dame.
[w]I guess I don't have enough ko threats for this?  True, but then again B is in the same position.
See var.
Try something else instead. See var.
[w]i should've let this threat by.... i wasn't looking at the big kill on the right.  Yes good idea however B would have played T12 and give up R18 and still win by 8.5 points.
[w]this doesn't work, i found out ; ) do you see any other place i could play to threaten?  G18.
[eversonyoshi]: I like Hoshi (4-4) because it is flexible. When I said that it is "fast", is because you spend one move to enclose the corner.  White could invade and survive in the corner, but this is bad because it would survive small and the Black influence would spread in the whole board. There are many fusekis that can be made with Hoshi, like Chinese Fuseki and the San-Ren-San.
[eversonyoshi]: Usually people play in the opposite corner to avoid the "Diagonal Fuseki" and the fights that usually come with it. I read that players that has confidence in their Go play this way... White seems to be this kind of person... ^_^
[eversonyoshi]: Good, I am trying to learn this fuseki too. See the variant about other choices. I will not enter in details in the fuseki because it is very difficult and I think that it is early for you. Just keep the names in your mind because you will have to learn them in the future.
[eversonyoshi]: He called you "mime", but he was the one who started copying you... ^_^
[eversonyoshi]: When you play a second stone to enclose the corner, this is called "Shimari". Usually, 4-4 doesn't have Shimari neither the 3-3.   Your move is not bad, but it doesn't put pressure in White. See the variant for alternatives.
DaveConley: definately  [eversonyoshi]: See? P3 is a Kakari in the same side of D4. A good way to break this is to attack with a Pincer ("Hasami").   You have many options like low hasamis (L3, M3 and N3) and high hasamis (L4, M4 and N4). But hasamis sometimes lead to complex sequences, I recommend you to see "Kogo's Joseki Dictionary" or the site "Sensei's Library" to learn more about Hasami (Pincer).
[DaveConley]: Here, I kind of copied his move to see what kind of response I would get and maybe get a little insight on how aggressive he was.  [eversonyoshi]: This is a cool strategy. Trying to understand the other player is good too.
Jon7: you a mime?<_>  [eversonyoshi]: He copied you and you copied him... it is fair to me... ^_^
[eversonyoshi]: In the joseki, Black plays in E16 instead of R7. But seeing the whole board, you move seems better than E16 to me. =)
[eversonyoshi]: I think that you should have played at Q4 or even P4, to avoid White S4...   Maybe you played C6 to cancel the power of the marked stones in the upper left corner, this is a good plan. C9 and C10 do the same job too.
[eversonyoshi]: You were talking about understant the other player... If he want to make territory in the left side, he would have played a Hasami in C8 or in the other marked points.  But to me, he wants the lower side.
[eversonyoshi]: Usually, Black continues in D7, see variant.
[DaveConley]: I'm very curios about this move, since this next sequence of moves I really didn't favor.  [eversonyoshi]: To me, you played C8 trying to fix the sequence, otherwise, White would make a beautiful wall with the marked stones.
[eversonyoshi]: I would like to save B4 to put pressure in White later, but I think that D7 is better now because you group will "run" to the center (where it has more chance to survive) and will impede White to make a great wall (that would be annoying...).   Well, I will make variants for you in the next move. =)
[eversonyoshi]: I prefere D7 to attack with D13 later. I will make two variants showing what I said in the last move.
[eversonyoshi]: I think that E9 is a better shape, see variant.
[eversonyoshi]: Sometimes you have to defend in B9 instead of A9, like now.
[eversonyoshi]: You deal well with the situation... =)
[eversonyoshi]: But now, White is strong in the upper left side. And your group has only one eye... I belive that a dan player can kill it. Usually, it is good to chase these kind of group and threathen to kill them because you earn something in the process (territory or influence).
[eversonyoshi]: I prefer F8 because is easier to make life in the center.
[eversonyoshi]: See... A6 and B7 are "Miai". If you play in one of these points, White can play in the other and you will have just one eye... So you will have to make the second eye in the center. If White see this, he can take advantage. =(
[eversonyoshi]: Good, now you have more options to survive...
[eversonyoshi]: I think that this move is a little risky, I prefer F6, see variant...
[eversonyoshi]: This leads to a double atari, if White wanted to kill, he should have more patience... See variant.
[eversonyoshi]: In Go, read some moves ahead is important. White needed to read just 2 moves ahead. Try to read 4 or 6 moves ahead during a fight, this will prevent you to make this kind of mistake (the double atari).
[eversonyoshi]: I think that you can play G6 to use F4 and gain some points, see variant.
[eversonyoshi]: I prefer G4 instead of F3 to kill and contain F4...
[eversonyoshi]: You are trying to build a big moyo, inviting White to invade. This is a good idea. When White invade, it will be difficult to kill directly, but you can threaten the group and profit with it.   I like L17 too. R10 is another good point, but it is more urgent to strenghten E17 and H17 to avoid White to attack and invade at the same time...
[eversonyoshi]: White is helping you to strenghten your group... I prefer an attack at O17 or R10.
[DaveConley]: ?????  [eversonyoshi]: What? It is a good move, now the marked Black stones are strong enough to fight back (if it were necessary). Q10 defends this part of the board and will help to attack any White attack in the upper right  corner... =)
[eversonyoshi]: In beginning I said that White could invade in 3-3 and live, but Black would get a huge influence in the center. Now, the invasion is worst, since the Black influence can become territory because of the surrounded stones. I would prefer O17 or even O16.
[eversonyoshi]: The right side since your moyo is huge. Now it is clear that the invasion helped you.
[eversonyoshi]: Q15 is possible too to avoid "Aji". Aji is a japanese term that is used when you have some weak point that doesn't work now, but can work if the situation change a little.
[DaveConley]: Maybe R 18 would have been better?  [eversonyoshi]: I like R14 in this case to avoid the atari in Q15. Well, let's see your variant about R18... =)
[eversonyoshi]: P18 is the move that you was looking for this situation. See variant.
[DaveConley]: I'd really like to how I could ran the following sequence better.  [eversonyoshi]: Yeah... It was painful because ruined your moyo a lot... =(
[eversonyoshi]: I prefer P14... But now, the whole upper right corner was ruined, White is leading now.
[eversonyoshi]: This move is small... White can attack the other Black group with L17 or defend his moyo in the lower side with L4.
[eversonyoshi]: Right. You are building another big moyo.
[DaveConley]: And here is where the game frustrated me the most. I thought I played it well, and my opponent was just digging a whole for himself. But as you will see,by move 168, I lose the game.    Was white sure he had me, or was he just to stubborn to let his group die, hoping that I would make a mistake?  [eversonyoshi]: I agree that White helped you (Black) to build this huge wall, but the White group is surely alive. K16 is an annoying cut point, but you can deal with it... =)
[eversonyoshi]: Right, atari at J16 (instead of K15) could be dangerous since White could try to make a living group in the center.
[eversonyoshi]: I confess that I would have played at J15 to avoid problems, but you played very well in this situation, congratulations! =D
[eversonyoshi]: Nice.
[eversonyoshi]: Almost. You reduced the White's liberties and now you could have catched it with a Net ("Geta"). See variant.
[eversonyoshi]: Even so, I can't see a way for White to leave... ^_^ See variant.
[DaveConley]: Maybe here is where I should attacked somewhere else. But I was just to concered for my 6 chain group with only 3 liberties. Was I wrong?  [eversonyoshi]: You were right. Your 6 chain group will die only if White cut at P14. But when it happens, you give atari at O14 and escapes. Probabily, White wanted to kill it with a Net, but he was waiting for your mistake and it is not a good strategy. =P
[eversonyoshi]: Good, you catched him... =)
[eversonyoshi]: White is dead anyway, but you could have finished it with O13, see variant.
[eversonyoshi]: Be careful with the "Empty Triangule" shape, try to avoid this. You could have played at N11, for example.
[eversonyoshi]: These White stones are weak, so you can chase them with J11. If you want to destroy the lower side K3 is good. You move is good too.
[eversonyoshi]: This is different... O_o
[eversonyoshi]: Now, the marked White stones are weak... =(
[eversonyoshi]: I think that you could have played O1 to keep the pressure. See variant.
[eversonyoshi]: He connected the two groups and they become strong. Try to split the groups of your opponent to weaken them. ;D
[eversonyoshi]: Good, the White center group is almost dead.
[eversonyoshi]: G9 is more safe. But if you want blood, you can play F12 too... ^_^
[eversonyoshi]: I still prefer G9 to avoid headache.
[DaveConley]: It seemed to me I had two options here: 1- Sacrifice my 4 stone group and play at J12 or J11 2- Or play at G14 hoping white couldn't survive in the center and I could connect the 4 stone group. --But now I'm curious about H14. It would have left my 3 stones with 3 liberties and his 3 stones with only 2. ?? -- Either way I underestimated whites determination to live and it comes back to haunt me shortly.  [eversonyoshi]: I made a variant with H14, but because of the surrounded stone, you couldn't have time to kill the White group. For me, G14 is right.
[eversonyoshi]: J11 kill the White group with a net, see variant.
[eversonyoshi]: Now, this become a Ladder (Shicho), but L11 breaks it.
[eversonyoshi]: Oops, you will ask for K9, but I made a variant with J9! XD  But it works too... ^_^'
[DaveConley]: Another mistake I do believe. Maybe I should have played at K9??  [eversonyoshi]: No, K9 instead of H9 doesn't work, see variant...
[eversonyoshi]: White can survive playing H8, but I think that he wanted to revive his huge group, but he is counting with your mistake... See variant.
[DaveConley]: L12 ??  [eversonyoshi]: L12 is good, but doesn't kill your big group, just ruin your territory.
[eversonyoshi]: This is becoming dangerous for Black.
[DaveConley]: K12 ??  [eversonyoshi]: See variant... =)
[eversonyoshi]: You didn't see the Snapback ("Uttegaechi"). It is a pitty... =(
DaveConley: bravo Jon7: thanks Jon7: snapback [DaveConley]: The play that lost me the game!!  [eversonyoshi]: Yes. But White did it believing that you would play wrong, this is not a good strategy.
[eversonyoshi]: Now it is late. I would try O10 and H8. But you lost a lot with this snapback. =(
Jon7: better save the other 2 guys,or you die.....  [DaveConley]: whoops
Jon7: thats 1  [eversonyoshi]: If he wants to advice, he should tell you earlier... =P
[eversonyoshi]: This doesn't work.
[eversonyoshi]: This worth only one point. There are another points that worth more, like D13, S2 and T18.
[DaveConley]: and whoops yet again. I have a problem with losing focus once I make a mistake. It just seems to start a bad chain of events!  [eversonyoshi]: Yes, after losing a group, if you think that you still have chance to catch up, try to pay more attention. The same thing happens after killing a big group. Never let your guard down. ;D
Jon7: uh oh... DaveConley: oops Jon7: ok...
Jon7: oops..  [eversonyoshi]: Was this a misclick? O_o
Jon7: nice
[DaveConley]: Does white have a plan here?  [eversonyoshi]: No... XD After his mistake, your group are connected with the right side. And the E16 group are connected with a "Bambu Joint" ("Takefu"). Neither a Jedy or Chuck Norris can kill it... XD
[DaveConley]: I don't understand the needless sacrifice.  [eversonyoshi]: Maybe he is waiting for your mistake, or he wants to train your attention. ^_^
Jon7: no! [DaveConley]:  ^^ And what was that comment all about, did I miss an opportunity here?  [eversonyoshi]: Maybe he was trying to scary you, I don't know... XD There is nothing wrong here... =)
[DaveConley]: Why not just O18?  [eversonyoshi]: You are right. O18 is better because it doesn't let "Ko threats". O19 lets two ko threats.
[eversonyoshi]: R5 doesn't work.
Jon7: oops
[DaveConley]: Would most players left this group for dead?  [eversonyoshi]: Yes, this group doesn't have room to make two eyes. =)
Jon7: bravo
[DaveConley]: I love ko battles!! I can't resist. Any advice as to where I would research getting better in these situations?  [eversonyoshi]: Good because Ko is important in Go. This ko worth only one point. But there are Kos that can value the game. Before entering in a Ko battle, you have to count how many Ko threats each one has and the value of all the threats.   This analyse is difficult and it takes time. If you want to get better in Ko battles, try to improve your read skills. A good way is solving "Tsumegos" (Go Problems). And the best place to do this, in my opinion, is in the site of Go Problems... ^_^
[eversonyoshi]: These shapes give you two Ko threats, and worth six points. See variant.
[eversonyoshi]: Since you have more Ko threats, you could have played in O1. And a evil threat was K4... ^_^
[DaveConley]: Should have just passed huh?  [eversonyoshi]: White should have captured O1, but he doesn't want, maybe...
stephand [3k]: salut - à toi aussi
kprist [4k]: merci
stephand [4k]: I do not feel confortable at this stage and tend to play at P3 so as to avoid a black move at K3. Am I right or should I play somewhere around Q4?  >>Q4 is fine, everything is OK so far.  No need to fear K3, you need to change attitude.
>>right side is uninteresting because top black is already stable, I think K3 is good for white instead
>> This move has no effect on black. White's territory is still not solid, it's gote. You must think this far before playing Q5
stephand [4k]: At this stage, I feel that white didn't achieve a lot and is still behind black  >> depends on opinion, I think it's still too early too say.  if you do badly when you're behind, try playing handicap games (as white). you give weaker opponents between 2-4 stones, you'll be more confident when you're behind.
>> white f17 to  prevent black g17 instead and to protect top group indirectly. similar to the right side, now bottom is uninteresting for either player because black has a Low-but stable group at the bottom right.
stephand [4k]: Maybe this was the big mistake, D10 would have been much more stronger?  >>you need to defend, or black will attack strongly at the top. this is OK.
stephand [4k]: Also if G3 would have been at F3 would have I felt more secure?  >> There is no best move, it's just choice and preference.  >> G3 is not bad if you can give a reason to yourself why you chose it over f3
stephand [4k]: What should have been the right answer there?  >> this move will make black stronger, to defend corner is C4
seems low
stephand [4k]: At this stage, I feel that I didn't attack the three black corners properly and this may have been the reason to still be so weak at this stage.  >> getting only one corner is very common as white, I usually win giving black 3 corners or even 4.   >> possible to attack center group now, capture if you can.
stephand [4k]: There may be some better move to attack this corner?  >> I'd try probing by attaching yourself to a black stone.  Whatever you do you must get sente here.  It doesn't matter if you lose stones there will be aji later on.
>>to end in gote is a failure.
>> I'd atari on the other side and eat them all  >> if you think you're behind there is no other choice but to eat center.
>> maybe a bit better atari from d16
H.: Here I just started a joseki. I was not sure if it is good or not, or how exactly to choose a joseki fitting to this situation. I had a variation in mind, and exactly that variation will stand on the board later, but I will not be happy with it when it's there ..  janr: .in the most common variation white gets influence on the right side and black gets thick towards the top side.  Given the positions of white's and blacks adjacent corners this limits the expansion of both sides.
H.: Here. I thought: When there's a black shimari in the upper left, then I would bend around here as the ladder works, and prevent thickness working well with the shimari. So I thought: I don't want him to get thickness facing my hoshi, so maybe that variation fits here too ..  janr: the variation seems possible to me..
janr: I would prefer the variation (A is a vital point while B makes an empty triangle)
janr: black makes good shape and white gets heavy on the right
H.: This is what happened. and now it seems that this group is not working well with my hoshi stone. What should I have done instead, and how would I think to find that out in a game?  janr: locally i prefer to play at A.  this leaves no black forcing moves around B and aims at building further around C.  It also works on slightly larger scale in combination with the hoshi. My major concern is still the heavy group on the right.
janr: I prefer to play at A. this avoids a forcing move at B and allows therefore white to run faster towards the center
janr: pushing from behind over the fourth line is very painful
H.: Since he comes in at C17 directly after my check, should I have checked from below instead? Or was L3 bigger?  janr: I think A and B can be considered miai for black.  C is clearly a big move.  The D-E-F construction has the 3-3 point open.  after a 3-3 invasion, D-E-F is worth much less than the 3 stones invested I think.
janr: The standard sequence will not give white a good result. One can see this now already (A is too close to the wall).  Therefore, I would examine variations such as B/C/D, E and F
H.: Too overconcentrated to bare - In my 2k-feeling at least. The black center group seems not likely to be attackable all too profitably. At least I would not know where or how to start.  janr: I would still prefer A at B.  Connecting at C feels very slow but unfortunately probably necessary.  Maybe D is a good alternative
H.: He even got sente to extend from his stone.
janr: white is strong around B, so i would prefer to attack at A.
janr: I would prefer A or B.  The game move allows black to make the larger extension to C, to make the invasion at D and to make the invasion at E.
janr: I would stupidly defend at A.
H.: Somehow he invades every of my positions. I know, walls are good, but are the black groups really still weak enough to be attacked profitably? How should I have prevented this result?  janr: walls are only good if there are weak groups to attach.
janr: A looks like an urgent place.
janr: A is better
janr: now two cutting points A and B remain
H.: Okay, so I have surrounded him somewhat and weakened the lower right a bit, but I think I have to use this wall for a good purpose now, if still possible. Not even time to guard at H6 or K6.
janr: black can capture this stone easily.
janr: I would cut off at A.  It makes a few points and connects the white stones.  later, attacking is still possible, or playing B will force black to spend a move to live.
janr: A is better (or maybe B?)
H.: Now I desperately started a splitting attack, that maybe it might be already too late for a successful split.
janr: there is white thickness at the top, so if white wants for fight, A looks like a sensible idea.
If white is really desparate, he could try the sacrifice at A.
janr: killing black is now very difficult as black played the marked stones in sente
H.: So my opponent lived everywhere, and he's ahead in actual territory. playing something like F14 seems too gote for me, especially since I still have walls which I should try to put to a use.
janr: this move aims mainly at making some small territorial points, not at attacking. I would prefer A
janr: walls are not intended to make territory but to attack.
H.: So I used the walls to take 20 points. But his right side also solidified.
H.: I hoped for some chance to still kill, but it was not possible as it seems.
H.: So I switch to this side, trying to rumble into it as far as I can.
H.: Here maybe I really should have played around H15?
janr: A is the most white can get.  In the end he has the marked shortage of liberties
H.: I had the feeling all the time, that there must be something to do here ... but my reading didn't show anything, and my intuition messed the thing up. Was here something hidden here to really use the aji of my stone and the push at R4 to the fullest?
H.: Not even a ko ... did I start the whole thing wrong, or wasn't there anything in the first place?
A is normal
H.: Was more possible in this corner?    >From here on it's only endgame. In the end I lose with 5,5 points.    (No further questions in the file.)
A is clearly bigger
Dear reviewer,  This game became very unbalanced which often happens to me. I got lots of territory, my opponent a huge influence... then i lost. Can you review the game with this in mind? i'm black here.  thanks, gougou.
reid: Hello Gougou.  The normal response for black when he wants to play along the side is A.  Of course, black can also play the joseki at B or the pincers around C too.  The game result from black O17 is very bad for black.  We'll talk about that in a few moves.
reid: Because black played low at O17 instead of high, it is natural to want to make this aggressive hane.  If black is going to hane on the inside with R18, then of course O17 should be higher at O16.  Unfortunately, the result of this hane is not good.
reid: but now the white stones are very happy.  Black has played first in this corner, but his result is less than 10 points..  White has very nice shape on the outside, worth at least 10 points, and the black stone at O17 is wasted (too close to white's thickness).  Just to hammer the point home, here's a bit of reverse analysis: if black had captured the R17 stone with R18 instead of descending at Q18, white still might play at P18.  Would black then want to play at Q18 in exchange for white O16?
Seems w needs to add a move, no?  reid: This white shape is very strong.  It is hard for black to attack it directly, so no, I don't think white needs to defend right away.
reid: black is playing too close to the strong white stones (the proverb says "play away from strength").  Better to leave this attack for later, I think.
reid: I think white should play more firmly with A.  It's going to be hard for black to make good shape here.  In the game, white loses the P19 stones partly because of this loose play at M16.
reid: white is pushing from behind - this helps black.
reid: Too far, as subsequent play demonstrate.  Black A is sufficient.
reid: Of course, white pushes and cuts.
Seems H18 is impossible here... so probably f17 was wrong...  reid: Yes, F17 is too far.  And white H18 looks better than K18.  K18 helps black make good shape.
reid: Exchanging G16 for black H15 looks bad for white.  Better to just play F18.  Black gets G16 in sente, but black G16 is much less damaging to the white position than H15.  For example, without this exchange, black can save his P19 stones with D (after black A, white B, black C) instead of sacrificing them as happened in the game.
what is your assessment so far?
reid: this is a painful gote sacrifice for white, but black's awkward shape makes it easier to swallow (and those white stones aren't doing anything strategic anymore anyway).  Probably better for black to leave tha atari at O15 for later.
reid: It looks like black has a bit more than 25 points in the upper right corner.  The lower right is fairly balanced with two stones each.  Black has one stone in the lower left corner to white's upper left corner plus central influence.  The three black stones at H15 are more a burden than anything else.  It looks like the white corner (without counting anything for the three H15 stones) can easily be as big as black's upper right.  That means it's black's single lower left stone against the white central influence plus the H15 burden (plus komi).  I think black is in trouble.
maybe around c10 is better?
reid: Black needs to run out at A instead.  A proverb says "run before living".  It might seem like this is eye shape for both sides, and it is in some sense, but white can't make eyes here without hurting his R10 stone, so black doesn't need to rush to play here.
reid: Ouch!  Black gets enclosed.  White is building thickness that will work well with his existing influence.
reid: This looks like aji-keshi for white.  He should leave this move for later.  Perhaps he could do something in the corner later, but after black responds at Q4, there is no aji left.  A black move at P5 would not be terrible for white (and it would be gote).
so who is better now overall?  reid: Black gained a large corner, but white's stones are working together nicely.  I think white is still ahead, just not by as much.  After this point, I think black is just trying to catch up while white only needs to use his thickness to make territory.  I think the significant part of this game is, as you mentioned in the introduction, that black went for territory while white gained outside influence.  Early in the game, influence tends to be more important than territory.  I think black should try some games where he goes for influence instead of territory.  Practise using influence to learn how to use it.  Good luck, play strong.  Analysis ends here
is d13 overly conservative?
Please also comment on the endgame moves.
Have you a better suggestion?  well, it's an unusual move, but I can't say it is bad. A would be standard move or approaching at B or C.
this move looks a bit odd
this is not good from w, aji keshi
you should ivade the lower left, I would chose one of the 5 suggestions, unfortunately I can't tell you which is best.
that's an endgame move  you should instead ivade the lower left, I would chose one of the 5 suggestions, unfortunately I can't tell you which is best.
what does this move chieve? endgame again...  your corner is alright... so play somewhere else, with c4 in place invasion becomes harder, but you need it. I would have chosen A or B as Invasion point
ok, your 2 stones need life... but h4 is helping your oponnent stabilizing his moyo.  I would leve these two stones by now, instead still invade. late you might live with A or B or running into the center, there's no immediate danger.
w is getting much too much territory
right idea, but a bit late. Now I would have played it at A, which makes it harder to attack it
bad move by W, I think you should hane now
there's no need to answer d14
this is all endgame
Is the white group around H17 catchable? I have tried it, but  it worked not....
I haven't found a better move...  I don't see a way to kill th e W group... it can either connect to the left or to the right.  Review ends here, the rest is endgame, W just keeps the lead he has at this moment.
...and white escapes.
it seems better to move M2  yes
my "chating" move - after white J5 the black group is dead
a mistake...
Hamburg Rahlstedt 25.Tengen am 10./11.11.2007 7. Runde: HL (8k) - RS (10k)  Schwarz gibt auf.  Black resigns
paragoomba [17k]: hello
mariabelen [17k]: good game
paragoomba [17k]: good game
j: I like this move as I tend to favor similar moves :-) But you must be aware this is a move to go for influence and to confine the opponent, it will not yield any inmediate territory for you.
j: He goes for save... I'd prefered p17, but...
j: this may be a forcing move, but too early in the game IMHO. Aji keshi - you're losing future chances
j: you both are playing too localy here. I think a extension in the upper side is a better idea
j: pay a look at the simple variation for next move
j: small. at least p17
j: not bad as you both played in a similar way. This would be much better if the D16 stone were white! Don't forget to USE the wall
j: again too early imho.
j: don't like the moves here... please pay a look at suitable alternatives
j: useless now
j: small. Leave that for the endgame
j: unneeded. Should have played somewhere else
j: a pity b was able to play here. You'll have a difficult game, B has most of the actual territory
j: why not r10??
j: good idea, jump forward... but why not r9??
j: you must press at some moment, bend him, play r7!
j: now this is a big mistake, maybe the most notorious so far. This is extremely small and local, this move does not threat anything, and you're so behind in territory..  You should be pursuing BIG moves now, and start making territory!
j: again the same problem. You absolutely forgot the rest of the board.
j: ... and black took the upper hand again
j: absolutely meaningless. Black should tenuki
j: this move is worth...5 or 6 points? black should close the upper left corner or go D2 or j3 to help settle that stone...
I have been doing some research into the opening on tengen. The previous game I played my opponent used it (as black) and I won. So for this game I thought it interesting to try opening on tengen. This is my first game using tengen as a first move. I am very much interested in any thoughts on the use of tengen.  FishGo: Opening at tengen as white is very rare, but, why not?  No one can say if it's a good move or bad move.  One thing to keep in mind is, if you play tengen at the beginning you have to follow up with moves that works with the tengen.
From what I have read tengen is not usually played as white since it gives black three corners. Here I thought there was a possibility to invade the corners so it looked balanced to me.
FishGo: A is joseki but the direction is questionable because of the high stone marked, it can lead to the very complex avalanche joseki.  B is also possible.
FishGo: A seems a little slow.  B will lead to the small avalanche joseki, C will lead to the big avalanche joseki.  D is a move that is played when black wants to avoid the avalanche shape.
FishGo:  Black is better off playing at A or B.
FishGo: This atari is the reason why.
FishGo: Connceting at A is rather slow.  B is urgent for both.
Black plays this to protect the right side now white has influence in that direction.  FishGo: This move is fine but as I said in previous variations white's influence is not so great, A is still an urgent place.
I thought of invading here to turn the game into a large scale fight. Since tengen limits the outside influence of black this should be OK.  FishGo: I think it is a bit early
FishGo: Black is better off responding at A.  Ladder is good for black. One of the reasons why O16 is important.(see variation)
FishGo:  Black has plenty of choices here, I think B is the most reasonable.
FishGo: Double hane seems possible for black.  (see variation)
FishGo: Perhaps better at A.
FishGo: A does not work, white needs to play B to live.
This looks like a nice life and death problem.  FishGo: White dies unconditionally here.
FishGo: Not sure about this move, might be better to fix shape at A.
FishGo: Perhaps this hane is too much because the cut at A is surprisingly severe.  Even if black defends at B white has no good continuation.  C is not good either because black bottom group is safe.  I would jump out around D
FishGo: It was right for white to push one more.
FishGo:This result is good for black.  There is still a cutting point at A.
FishGo: This move is unusal.
FishGo: This kind of move is usually not desirable because it stregthens black's corner and moves aji.
FishGo: Atari at A would be painful for white, black can choose to play it anytime.
FishGo: A bit too hasty, normally one would defend at A or B.  C is still a good point.
FishGo: Overplay.  One space jump at A is as far you can go.
FishGo: Good.
FishGo: Connecting at B is better.
FishGo: Double hane works here.
Could black have done any better here?  FishGo: I am not sure if I understand your question.  After black pulls out at A, white has weak stones all over the board.
FishGo: A mistake by black, there is no problem if he connects at A.
FishGo: White must defend the marked group now!
This strengthens white and prepares for L10 invasion.  FishGo: This did almost nothing, black cuts at a and this game is over.
Prevents invasion.
Trying to ensure life for white while taking territory from black.  FishGo: White's group is still in great danger.
FishGo: This move is a little soft, it is better to cut directly. (see variation)
This was a bit of a dubious move from my side.  FishGo:  Either way white is still in great trouble. ( see variation)
FishGo: Better at A.
Black made a mistake by not placing P15.
FishGo: a mistake, should be at A.  (see variation)
FishGo: White is lucky to come out in one piece.
FishGo: Mistake by black, should be at A.
FishGo: White is better off giving up the three stones and save the marked group.
FishGo: This seems to work for black also, but cutting at A is more simple. (see variation)
FishGo: If black played at A it would have been more complicated. (see variation)
FishGo: Another mistake, at A is better than in the game.
FishGo: White got lucky again.
FishGo: Let's look at the board right now.  White: 15 combined top +top left; around 10 top right + centre group; 11 bottom group; 6 group on the right so, about 42 points and it's white's turn to play.  Black: 22 in the central group; around 5 bottom right corner; around 5 points with the group on the left; 5-6 points on top right corner because white has a yose move at P19. 37 points in total.    FishGo: In my opinion, White is comfortably ahead in territory.  Two points to be aware of is A, black can still pull out at anytime, B remains an important point for both.  Black's move at D3 is quite active, white has to answer carefully to avoid trouble.
FishGo:  This answer is way too passive, black should hane at A and take the corner.  Answering at A is one way. (see variation)
FishGo: It's better to hane at A.
FishGo: I think this is better at A.  (see variation)
FishGo: This cut is huge, I think the game is favourable for black now.
FishGo: This is an overplay.  White is not thick enough to do this.
FishGo: This is too gentle, see variation.
FishGo: This just doesn't work.
Now the situation looks a bit grim for white.
FishGo: A big mistake. (see variation)
FishGo: It's not so big.  Play the sente moves in yose first, for example around A is big for both sides.
Maybe not the biggest move.
FishGo: This move isn't very good, sticking on black's wall.  Better to capture the stone at A.
FishGo: A mistake, connect at A there should be no problem.  You are lucky to get a Ko.
Not a real ko threat.  FishGo: nope.
What is the best alternative for white? Or should white play elsewhere.  FishGo: play elsewhere.
FishGo: This is a good idea but it doesn't work.
FishGo: This is not a threat.
Black wins by 1.5 points.  I believe I lost because of losing the K10 and D10 groups.  FishGo: Nice game.  Well, in Go it's hard to point at a specific place where you lost the game.  Both sides made mistakes in fights but black seemed to have more of those.  Black played solidly and had a couple chance to put the game in the pocket in early-mid game.  Your adventurous moves early on left a lot of bad aji and some of them came back to hurt you late in the game.  I think you can improve your opening by paying more attention to your direction of play, especially before starting josekis and invasions.  Later in the game you need to be aware of the bad aji or your opponent or your own.  Good luck!
[kb]: This is fine, although if you want to play a moyo game, D6 ikken tobi is the move.
I dont know in wich cases is good to play r17 or o15. Now I've played o16, but was good?  [kb]: Generally, O15 ikken tobi is considered to be slightly worse for White - it gives Black too much territory on the side for not much compensation.  R17 would be fine here - Black doesn't have a good way to block.
I dont like this joseki. I usually loose when I play this. I dont know when is time to play it or not.  [kb]: ...then don't play it!
Acordin to The many Faces of Go's  Joseki dictionary I should have played M16, but I dont see the purpose of this move and its continuation. G14 aim to make moyo in the left side, and I can still invede r17 corner. I dont know if this general idea is good.  [kb]: You are fine with omitting M16.  Black here should probably defend with G17, but he also wants to play around E6/F6 to limit the White moyo (or wedge with C11).
[kb]: White says, 'Thank you!'
Or d15? I thought is was good to be a little closer to c6  [kb]: I have never seen this pattern before, but D14 looks good.
I think he should invade at D10 because my future moy is greater than his one.  [kb]: I agree completely.
[kb]: Great move.
Or C10? First I thought that C11 would help his sabaki, but C10 let him more space to make eyes
[kb]: What about connecting?
He'll  live in the cornerbut I assure my moyo in sente
Consistent with my general strategy of making moyo. O5 is bad now because will help him invade the moyo  [kb]: Here's a useful exchange you can remember.
Maybe it was time to r17 because m15 is not big and black o16 is big  [kb]: Yes!
I think is bigger than f5, and my invasion will be greather than his reduction of my moyo  [kb]: Or you can keep building your moyo...  Probes on the right side would also probably be useful.
[kb]: This is a sharp move - this is why you want to probe the right side first.
O3 should't scape because it would cause a reduction of my moyo
Better at N2
I think M10 is better because I reduce his moyo more than he does with mine  [kb]: This is probably necessary.
[kb]: I think Black could have played double hane.
[kb]: Overplay
I dint know if that way of closing moyos has been optimal. I have more territory but Could I have done it better?  [kb]: I wouldn't complain at all.  You are winning - and you got off easy on the bottom right corner of your moyo
[kb]: sv
[kb]: These moves don't do anything.
This white move is very surprising because it has little no no influence on the top-left corner. The best idea now would be to put a lot of pressure on the top white stone.
Your move is ok, but I would definitely play some moves in the corner first to prevent white from having too many points there.
I think your move would be slightly better at A
Good, put some pressure on white.
I believe in this situation a kosumi-tsuke at A is more apropriate.  Also, black would feel better if the marked stone had been placed at B now
This is very heavy for white. Playing sabaki at A seems more light and apropriate.
This is the key moment of the game. White has now three weak groups. That is way more than he can handle. Black must attack those.  Therefore, it is most important for black to play very solid moves that keep white separated. Hence black must not leave a single cutting point if it is not absolutely necessary.
This is a very bad move because it lets white connect.
Now white is connected and only has one weak group.
While lets black seal him in. This a poor choice, he shoul play at A to seperate black.
Never play on the first line unless you have a VERY good reason to do so. This move serves no objective at all.
Another useless move (see variation)
Huge move for white.
These two moves, played on the moyo frontier, are absolutely huge. Black gains close to nothing while white greatly expands his moyo.
With the marked stones out there, I think white's knght moves are too thin. Given you are now behind, better get some fighting going on.
White is ahead so he just lets black reduce.
If you have no intention of cutting white, play the corner now. It is by far the biggest move.
Last huge point. The corner was still open and worth at least 30 points. If black had played there, white would have had close to no chance of winning.
There is nothing left there.
This is an overplay. White should not be able to do anything there.
This leaves too much space to white.
Don't let white connect !!!!!!
Huge move.
This is useless now.
Bad style. You do not gain anything by not playing A.
Useless move.
It is very late to play here. Most yose has been played so white has very few weaknesses you could aim at.
White wastes a move to kill an already dead group. Somehow now the abusive black invasion was a success.
White looses a few point too. Another useless move.
You had better played at A. This does not punish white's mistake.
B is opening quite low.
This response seems odd.  B has comitted to playing a very low game.  There is no reason for you to overcompensate and go very high.  I would certainly have played R4 here.  That would give you a balance between low and high, and would force B to worry about gaining influence.
This is quite a strange response.  See here for normal joseki <http://senseis.xmp.net/?45PointJosekis>.  Imagine this sequence.  B opens R4, you respond P4, B plays tenuki.  Would you then make the M4 move?  I think not.. you would probably take advantage of B having left R4 alone.
This seemed very early for a 3x3 invasion, I figured I could use the sente I would gain here to my advantage, but the sequence threw me off.  B is pursuing low territory almost neurotically ^_^.  You nearly got the joseki right.  See the variation at move 20.
In retrospect, I think G2 would have been a better play, but I was sure there was some way to punish black for abandoning the usual 3x3 invasion joseki I'm used to seeing.
You are fine up to this point.
This is the mistake.  It seems like allowing B to crawl is giving him free territory, but really it's *ideal* for you.  You would love to let him crawl along the 2nd line all day.  The result is hugely in W's favor.  See variation.
What I missed about this move for black is that now the L4 ladder works for black.  Doh!
I won't comment on this fight.  It could have gone a number of ways, but you end up with the better result.  This is one reason it's good to submit games you lose.. there is more advice to give ^_^
Here you waste sente, see variation.
These B stones are already hopelessly weak.  Try to play as B here and see how you would use them if W didn't play E6.  There is some aji to be sure, but it's too early to address it now.  If you are worried about D10 being split, you have a much better option in approaching the top left corner, which is something you'd like to do anyway.  Always keep an eye out for efficient moves like that.  I'll add in some general advice here.  Often openings devolve into fighting, as this one did (usually because someone makes a mistake).  Some beginning players will get focused on the fight and forget that the game is still in the opening stages.  It seems like E6 is this type of move.  There are still *huge* moves on the board that are more opening-type moves.  Don't get tunnel vision on the fight.  Consider the entire board.  Often one of the opening-type moves will even help with the fighting, which is great efficiency.  By the way, when selecting what approach to use in the upper left, consider that you are trying to help out the D10 stone.  If you approach at C15, you are likely to get a pincer in response.  That will mean more struggle.  C14 is a move that is very unlikely to get a pincer, and D15 is okay as well.  Be thinking this way when you approach, especially when there is signigicant action nearby.  Each approach is similar, but they have their different purposes.
This is very nice for B now, he could not have hoped for this much gain out of those weak stones.
Not approaching the corner kind of forced you into an awkward move here.
Very strange.  This group is not threatened in the least.  This move gets you next to nothing.  That B responds is just lucky.
Again, there are *huge* moves remaining.  Trading small captures is end-game stuff.  If you're not fighting for survival, look around before you move.  (you should do that even if you are fighting for survival)
Lucky again.  B has much better options.
Still small.
This exchange has been good for B.  Your group on top is now isolated.  B is strong and can use that wall to attack.  You have simply assured yourself of territory that is already yours.  Granted, it's bigger than it might have been, but I still judge this in B's favor.  Given his ultra-low early game, he is very grateful to have this great influence in the center.
Finally!  At this point it's necessary.
This is a classic wrong move.  There is a very well known proverb that states "hane at the head of two stones" <http://senseis.xmp.net/?HaneAtTheHeadOfTwoStones>.  By making this move, you are inviting B to make that nice play, which he does.  Most often, when you play a shoulder hit (Q16) and your opponent extends to contact you (R16), you will want to continue extending in that direction to avoid the hane.  See variation.
Ouch!
B misses a chance here, see variation.
This has been beautiful for B.
This was poorly handled by B, probably because he didn't see the threat.  This is probably what turns the game.
Good advantage taken of that weak group.
This isn't necessary.  Keep it as a ko threat.
Totally unnecessary.  B wastes sente.
B wastes sente again.
And W wastes sente.  A2 is still big.
Im not sure what black was trying to do here..hoping I'd tenuki maybe?  Yes, this is silly.
A2 is bigger.  Always look to the corners for easy end-game points.
??
in retrospect K14 looks like it would have avoided the capture of my H16 group.  Don't speculate, read it out ^_^
B got it first.
I'm wondering if my last 2 moves were smart. They seem good, but most games I see don't go that way. -----------------------------  Pavel: They were good.  (My personal habit is to play moves like R13 to strengten the corner. Some players object to this that this way I avoid fighting and have less use of the game.)
Pavel: J18 forces W to strenghten so exchange B J18 W K18 brings  more to white - therefore it is a wrong black move. I would try M17
I tryed to overwhelm my opponents position by taking him on on 2 sides, but I don't think it went quite well. Should I have just stayed on one side, or just tenuki? ---------------------------------- Pavel: I prefer N17.   White group is certainly not weak (= it is not possible to gain advantage by atacking it - http://senseis.xmp.net/?Attack). Weak groups are a difficult concept but very important to grasp at some point.  As it is not weak, M17 has no advantages compared with a safer move N17.  But the problems that followed were mostly caused by later mistakes - I pointed some wrong moves.
I prefer N16. The black stone at M17 can be very useful even if you do not try to save it. See variant B.
Pavel: Next black move is a big mistake.  Black O16 is much better because B stays connected (see variant B)
Pavel: P14 prevents a cut at P15, which is not dangerous now but could be later, if there are white stones somehere around S17  (Actuallty, now I see that W soon explited the cut)
Pavel: M13 is much better, see the variant
Pavel: Now black should play P15 or so; he would save stones P+Q16 and probably kill white stone R14
Pavel: If I count right, Black Q14 would save all black stones
I kinda panicked about that upper right corner. I knew I pretty much lost that battle. So I tenuki-d and tryed to divert his attention elsewhere...  ---------------------------------------- Pavel: The battle became lost by this black move (tenuki), not earlier.   And as for a suitable move to tenuky, I would prefer R3, C13 or so. (Chinese proverb: Corner is gold, Edge is silver, center is grass)  It is generally good to cut white stones from each other but in this case it brings little use because each of them can make life on its own.
...and it obviously didn't work. --------------------------------------------------------------- Pavel: When fighting about something, you can tenuki (abadon this local fight) if:  1. either you are convinced that you win the local fight EVEN IF you give an extra move to the opponent (by your tenuki) -  (see http://senseis.xmp.net/?Status)  2. or you are sure that the opponent MUST answer your tenuki (that you can punish him very much if he uses your tenuki to win the local fight).  3. Or you are convinced that further play in the local fight would not save the fight.   You probably did it for reason 3, but if you are not sure (that the local fight is lost), it is better to continue.  Before you tenukied the fight was lost for W. W now played correctly and exploited your mistake (tenuki) and killed your 2 stones to save his own stones.
Pavel: It is wrong to try to save what has no chance to be saved.   I would strongly recommend solving goproblems, for example www.goproblems.com
Pavel: S13 brings you nothing. If you played N11 or C13 instead, you would gain something.
Pavel: Q11 also gains nothing. If white plays Q12, black is in no danger
P 10 gains much less than moves like R7 or C13
I think black cut at N10 has a chance to avoid caputre and if it does, it leaves stones O9-10 weak. (Master Kageyama says: If yo can cut, then cut).
My opponents seem to play there alot, but I can never find a proper defense to it. --------------------------- Pavel: I spent years in belief that I play badly if I cannot capture this stone. But is it not so. This stone cannot be captured. The corner enclosures that prevent an invasion  (= allow you to capture the invading stone) are:  C6-D4-E3 (but this takes too little territory) C4-D4-G3 (efficient with C8) - of course the presence of hostile stones (for example at J3) changes the situation an the enclosure  is then not invasion-proof C7-C3-D4-G3 C3-D4 (very inefficient) C3 alone (it is not the ideal opening for a beginner like you or me) C4-E3  Before this invasion, you had three unprotected corners, each requiring at least 2 moves to secure. Now you can see why I often adviced to play R7 or C13.  It would be a brick in creation an invasion-proof corner enclosure.  There are many reasons why invasions early in the game are wrong (disadvantegous), the main one is that white would allow you to make a strong  wall (a by-product of invasion) around white stones and such wall is especially efficient on an almost-empty board. So it is logical that W did not invade early.  You had many oportunities to secure your corners. You chose to do something else in these moments - this would not have been neccessarily bad, if you gained much by this. But I pointed your moves which gained little - these should have been used for example for corner enclosure.  See also:   http://senseis.xmp.net/?Enclosure  http://senseis.xmp.net/?InvadingAnEnclosure
Pavel: Good - a good way to prevent further spreading (this is what you should do if you realize that you cannot kill white)
Pavel: This is the right move, but I will mention that it would be very wrong if there were white stones instead of 3 black stones at P-Q 10-11.   White can cut at Q5 and his cutting stone will survive. If there were white stones as I mentioned, then the black stones R5 and Q7 would probably be captured.  See variant B
Pavel: Very good
Pavel: In such cases, black should prevent the cut t B, because this cut often ends by capturing P2 and white canextend to the left (as in variation W P3 B O3)  In this case black can prevent this capture but white still builds a strong chain of stones - see variation W P3 B P4)  If you had played O3 now, you would be spared many problems (like getting stones around P2 captured).
Pavel:   Now it is too late to save P2 stones, but group Q4 is safe.  B O2 is not useful, it helps white.  Instead of O2, black should tenuki (for example C13, later D17 - this together with H17 produces the safe formation as I mentiones)  If black plays B P4 ... B O4 to gain influence or territory near O6, he will gain very little. (But generally it is a good technique: you can put P4 and O4 for free - in sente - so you should do it if you gain something by it.)  If black plays O3, then O4, then N2 to save your P1 group, he will not succeed.
Pavel: Again, black helps white to become stronger.  Ask yourself: what was the goal (purpose) of this move?
Which group in the lower right should I have saved? ------------------------------- Pavel: It was wrong to try to save P1. You made moves to save Q4 group only when this group was in danger (which happened after W Q5) and this was rigth.
Pavel: I think refinforcing a corner would be a better choice for black.  By this move stenghtens the lonely black stone, but not very much - I think white still can cut it off (see variant B)
Pavel: Now black should properly read if cut at N10 works (because if the cutting stone survives, the resulting situation is advantageous for black) and eventually cut.  I am convinced that the cut works and captures O9 groups - see variant.
Pavel: This move achieves almost nothing compared with strenghtening the corner.   If black worried of W P6, thinking that W will connect O5 with O9, then I must say: - white will not connect after W P6 BQ5 etc.. - connecting would not help White because O4 group lives. If white is afraid of the cut at N10 works, he  has easier methods to save O9 than connecting to O6  As I said 1 move earlier, I think the cut B N10 works. If Black will not cut, he should strenghten the corner instead of this move.
Pavel: The same mistake. Later, when W invades your corner, you will ask yourself where you made a mistake - this move is a good example.
Pavel: I prefer E3. Altough F3 is not an attack, the rule http://senseis.xmp.net/?DontAttachWhenAttacking still applies.
Pavel: B C4 would let W less space to extend.
I tryed to back him away from the corner with this move. --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Pavel: back away? You mean deny the corner to white, because corner gives much eyespace? No - white is easily alive after D5.   I would certainly play Black C5 to let W less space.
Pavel: B C5 would bring you much more.
Pavel: Move B E8 was right if (and only if) the white cut at B (=F6) will not work o capture the black stones C1 to E6.   If W tries this, then the question is whether B can make two eyes.  I think that this time the W cut will not work (see variant B) so your moves were right.   A one-step jump like E8 is a very good strategy in this kind of "fighting about which line the opponent will get to ".
Pavel: Should be at D9
Pavel: Good. (But securing the corner gives black more)
Pavel: Empty triangle is mostly a very inefficient shape. (http://senseis.xmp.net/?TheEmptyTriangleIsBad)  B F4 would give your group three eyes = obviously alive.  But even better, B should not respond to the white move if B realizes that his group would still be alive.  In this case it will be alive, and so instead of strenghtening a living group, black should tenuki (http://senseis.xmp.net/?Tenuki)  for example at D17, C13 etc.  I added a variant showing that B would still be alive.
Pavel: Good
Pavel: Good
Pavel: Good! Ater B B15 there is a dangerous white cut which is difficult (at least for me) to tell how it would end. Maybe you would lose stones E17 to J18. You chose the right thing - not to risk the cut if you cannot calculate its result.   The harm made by a successfull cut is usually much bigger that the harm to the cutting player after an unsuccessful cut  (especially if the cutting player notices in time that his cut failed and does not continue). Therefore I think you should mostly cut when you are not able to calculate the outcome (for example at N10 earlier in the game). And for the same reason, it was wise here to not to risk the cut.  Of course, practicing in reading (http://senseis.xmp.net/?Reading) is very important - then you will fortell the result of most cuts and choose the right play (to protect or not to protect...).
Pavel: Black B18 might do much harm to W (it is a bit "advanced trick")
Pavel: I prefer C8
I played here to try and have some influence over that large empty space there. ------------------------ Pavel: I was thinking to make the same move (to secure territory). It is often wrong to try to make territory in the centre (http://senseis.xmp.net/?ThereIsNoTerritoryInTheCenter) and I am too weak in discerning it.  But I would probably do exactly this, so I think your move was very good.
Pavel: if H14 works, it is much better than F14. If it does not, it is much worse.  But I am convinced that it works (see variant)
Pavel: I prefer G11,
Pavel: This move brings black almost nothing.  I would cut at N10 (see variant)  it is the endgame, the status (life) of groups has been solved and your task is to reduce the opponent territory and prevent him to reduce yours.  Some other moves: M9, T6, H4, M5, A9
Pavel: This moves also brings very little
Pavel: A bigger reduction of W territory would be better, such as M9.  If B intended to connect, I must say that there is no use in connecting two groups if they are both easily  alive
Pavel: Good, but M9 etc. is stronger.
Pavel: Good
Pavel. I do not see the purpose of this move. Think about the purpose which you saw in it.  P9 is better M9 even more because W must respond the cut at N10 will now work even easier...
Pavel: Needless. O8 would be better, but I prefer M8, A9 etc.
Pavel: This B move prevents (in gote) W from gaining 1 point in gote (by slight reduction of B territory) A9 or M9 would gain more and the opponent would have to answer  (If you do not know these terms, see http://senseis.xmp.net/?Sente, http://senseis.xmp.net/?Sente and for more advanced reading, http://senseis.xmp.net/?BasicEndgameTheory )
Pavel: This move gains very little
Pavel. So does this one.
Pavel: Good.
Pavel: Very good!! Because you have no sente plays now, you play the biggest gote play.
Pavel: Ignore this node - my clicko)
Emoticon [17k]: Hello and good game
sai59460 [17k]: bp
this is an unusual high move - common pincers are f16 or f17 - other ways to play are making a base on the left side with c10, the sequence following is considered as even. with your move the direction of white's play is center-orientated, trying to make a moyo in the center.
black plays solid
i think this move is good, when you played a pincer at f16 or f17 - now its easy for black to slide under your stones, as he did with his next move. better was f17
Looks like I let black to take a comfortable position.  yes - this is the result of your high approach move. black deprives you of your base and you have to makeyour points in the center, which of course is much more difficult than in the corner.
better for black would have been to make a base on the right side it is not necessary for him to start a fight
which pincer do you mean? but this was an excellent move from you - splitting the black group
Should I have played pincer instead?
well done
this was not necessary as you can see from the variations now black can try to make life in the corner
a lot of variations - maybe you find some better for white
this is the key-move in all the sequences - you have to prevent it. now blck lives.
you have a wall down there - so you have to hane in the other direction.  allways press your opponent against your wall!
Maybe I did this exchange too early  this was not urgent - now black can strengthen his upper position and you loose the possibility to invade the corner
Maybe E5 or F4 would be better?  no you still should try to kill the black center-stones, the 3 stones are not enough points
untill here you had the chance to cut!! you have a strong wall in the upper part so it would be hard for black to escape
Is there better way to handle invasion-extension like this one?  yes see move 110
Wasn't it a "thank you move"?
Maybe kosumi would work better here.
now black runs into your group and steals a lot of points
Again, was there a way to lose fewer points?  see the comment before
This move later allowed me to make the stupidiest mistake ever in this game. ^^'
My stupidiest error in this game.
Doesn't look like it's possible to gain sometheing here, but I decided to five it a try.
I wasn't really sure what I was suposed to do here. I think that I should have gone closer to the side.  [DP This is an ok corner enclosure for W, although a little open.  More standard moves against the chinese opening are around K4 or O17]
[DP This is no time to be invading with all those big points still open.  You can make an ideal extension from your shimari at D10, and should do so]
[DP Sensible response from B, putting pressure on W stone and increasing influence on the right side at the same time]
[DP Lacks fighting spirit.  Keep B separated by jumping into the centre with M5]
[DP Again, good pressing move from B who will be happy with the way things have started]
[DP Good, this creates some cutting points]
[DP I think better to connect K5 for solidity.  A W ponnuki here would be very strong]
[DP Good - this is an excellent point]
[DP Yes, attach against stronger stone, which you have correctly done]
[DP Poor choice as this move gives up sente. A better move would be G16.  B playing at B16 is no threat to you]
[DP The erasure of B moyo is more difficult because of the timid K3 move earlier. However, this is the correct way to start]
[DP This is from the wrong direction.  B is strong in bottom right, and so should play Q11 to push W towards his thickness]
[DP Ouch - that situation at R10 needs resolution - not the time to tenuki. B should simply draw back at R8, or perhaps better play aggressively at Q10]
[DP W stays in the correct area, although Q9 better for making shape. See variation]
[DP B should be cutting W to pieces here, instead of focusing on territory]
[DP Unreasonable paranoia from B, who is too strong to be hurt here. Better Q9 and cut]
[DP W has got away with murder here!]
[DP This move is more powerful than it looks, and lays the ground for the later decimation of W left hand side]
[DP Better to  threaten from afar with a move like G16]
[DP Good from B again, beginning to recover from his poor response to the P9 sequence]
[DP Fighting spirit says push up at G5 here]
[DP Good move putting cutting points into B shape]
[DP it would be better to stop B getting into the left hand side, and the push-through is nothing to be worried about. A costly mistake, given what happens later on in the game]
[DP Good invasion at the correct time]
I think here I should have gone at S17  [DP Yes, S17 links to R14 in this shape. See variation]
[DP This removes a potential ko threat you would have had for later, and strengthens B.  Poor move, which is not hard to read]
[DP Ouch.  Throwing good money after bad, here!  If anything, you should be playing on the other side with a move like O14 to create some territory on the right, or O9 to shore up the left hand side, or G16 to threaten B at the top]
I feel I should have saved that stone.  [DP Well, you should never have been playing in that area, really :-) ]
[DP A truly horribly small move!  By now, 100 moves into the game, you should have some idea what the score is, and play accordingly.  Here is an approximation: B Top Left           15 Top Right        15 Bottom Right  30 Centre Left        5 Prisoners          2 Total                 67  W Top Left            15 Bottom Left      35 Top Right         10 Prisoners           0 Komi                   0.5 Total                  60.5  so you are behind and need to do something, like trying to make a centre moyo with G8 (sente) followed by O14]
[DP B correctly removes some aji and becomes much stronger in the centre]
[DP O14 still miles better.  Be aware of how strong the ponnuki shape is - so if you want to reduce its influence, you need to play a little further from it, say J14]
[DP B is playing too close to his own thickness here, which W can take advantage of]
[DP The cut is ok as long as you intend it to be a sacrificial stone so that you can retain sente]
[DP Good money after bad again]
[DP Luckily W comes to his senses just in time!]
Maybe E9 first  [DP E9 is tiny and not forcing.  What you did is the correct move]
[DP No - this stone is no threat.  You need to play K11 or O14]
[DP B gets the big point in the exchange]
[DP This forcing move is ok as long as you are going to do something with it!]
[DP this needed to be at O14 again]
[DP This move effectively seals the game in favour of B]
[DP where is your fighting spirit??  make him battle with O14 or something]
Cookies [7k]: o.o Cookies [7k]: n14? :3
Probably should have saved that stone.  [DP Well, either save it, or defend the cut at P11.  You can't afford to ignore both. Saving it would have been the better option, giving you around 20 points on right hand side]
[DP Now defend P11]
[DP Unnecessary from B, and gives W a "get out of jail free card".  He already has an eye around A8, and another when he captures H8 stones.  So he should cut at P11 right now, or play the big endgame moves like O2 or S9 (see variation)]
[DP What is this move trying to achieve?  You need to defend the cut at P11. That would have been enough for you to have a chance in the game. Score approximation IF you had played P11: B Top Left           15 Top Right        15 Bottom Right  30 Centre Left      15 Prisoners          4 Total                 79  W Top Left            25 Bottom Left      35 Top Right         15 Prisoners           2 Komi                   0.5 Total                  77.5  so it would have been very close]
[DP Yup - this is big]
[DP Good - this regains some of your losses, but is too little too late]
[DP No, S10 is the sente move]
[DP S9 is actually better as it retains sente.]
[DP Yes, might as well have the points he's giving you]
[DP O19 would be bigger]
Jon:  This is a bad exchange for white, trying to get in this attachment in the corner makes white heavier while allowing black to strengthen both of his groups.  What should white do instead?
i wasnt sure about this move,maybe r2 is better?  Jon:  Yeah, the hane at R-2 is simpler and makes it harder for white to get a good result.
m3 seemed heavy here  Jon:  I agree, trying to pull out at M-3 wouldn't be worth the effort required to save it.
Jon:  Locally, I like this a lot for strengthening this group, but in the overall picture, considering that it's a handicap game, it's way too slow.   I'd like to play more aggressively and take a big point elsewhere.  Where's a big point white should take?  Also, on the bottom, regardless of timing, this move makes J-3 feel a bit uneasy, black has to worry about the invasion at white A later on.  It's too early to worry about strengthening J-3 right now, but you have to keep it in mind.  Because of this, I would consider playing J-3 at B instead to make an invasion there slightly less troubling for black.
Jon:  This move is necessary, but it's one step too early.  What should black do instead?
perhaps playing k16 was better here?  Jon:  Not sure what you're referring to here, do you mean black K-16 instead of C-17?   C-17's not a bad move, it was just played too early.
Jon:  Black doesn't have time to draw back and save the stone at A, white can freely settle his pincer stone by extending to B now.  What should black do instead?
Jon:  White is very happy to settle on the top, black's marked stones aren't feeling useful at all now.
Jon:  It's too early to make this reduction.  Black needs to worry about getting the marked black stones out of danger first before he can play this.  What's the best way for black to get the marked stones out of danger?
bad shape for black  Jon:  Yeah, and black doesn't have a base either, so he's in a lot of trouble here.  The problem was the reduction at B-15, it was made while black's stones were unstable.
Jon:  Trying to make a base in the corner is too small at the moment, so I'd prefer to get out into the center by jumping down to A instead.
Jon:  This isn't the best way to protect the cutting point, it doesn't threaten as much damage to white.  Can you find a better way to defend locally?
Jon:  Neglecting to maintain the connectivity between the two marked black stones is dangerous, but this also doesn't put any pressure on the invading white stone at A.    Can you find a better way to respond to white's invasion at A?
Jon:  For simplicity's sake, I would consider extending straight up to A to avoid leaving the aji of the cut.
Jon:  If you want to make this exchange first, you can destroy more of white's bottom left corner by making the hane at A instead.
i had to answer each peep but maybe there was better options?  Jon:  I found one way to resist white G-15 (with black F-13), but it isn't much better.  Other than that, I don't see much else by way of resistance.
Jon:  Because black can't get much more out of the attack on the escaping white stones, these marked black stones aren't as important anymore, so what if you tried to press into the center from the stone at A?
Jon:  The attack on white's stones is basically finished now, so this connection is an overplay.  Getting out the black stones on the top left with the jump to A wouldn't hurt, but white's center is looking very large right now, so you'll have to prepare to do something about it soon.
Jon:  This feels reasonable as a reduction into the center, I would also consider putting it at A to be slightly more careful.
it seems like i wanted too much  Jon:  Definitely, the black stones in the top left are being damaged in the process too.
Jon:  This is painful for black, white can now cut off black's escape route with the push at A.
Jon:  Black stretched too thin by leaving the cutting point at A.  It's more important to connect there to prevent white from taking advantage of this weakness in black's escape route as easily.
Jon:  In the actual game, white doesn't have to spend another move at around A to finish the separation, so this is a lot more troubling for black.  At this point, the game is in white's favor, so this is the last comment.  Please see move 145 for the final summary.
I resigned here.W had the ko in the UL corner and he could approach the q16 stone. Thanks for the review.   Jon:  Here are the most important points for this game:  1.)  Simplicity was the key issue at move 8 in the bottom right corner.  Sometimes you'll find that the simple choice is the best one.  2.)  Move 16 at J-3 was a nice idea, pressuring white's bottom right group without getting stuck worrying about saving a single stone (N-3).  3.)  In the top left corner:         A.)  When setting up a counterattack in those kinds of fights, it's best to move the pincered stone out of danger first, then prevent the connection underneath with the attachment in the corner (e.g. black C-17).         B.)  Peeping underneath white's corner stones should only be done when the stones you're attacking from are stable.   Thank you for allowing me to review your game!  If you have any questions about the review, please feel free to contact me.
xinwen:  This is a correct move, and standard approach to opponent's komoku at this fuseki.
Xinwen:  See the variation A B C.
Xinwen:  I believe D13 would be better to be at A. Leaving no aji peeking from opponent.
Xinwen:  I DESPISE this white if he/she really a 5dan.  1)This D10 isn't respecting a weaker player. 2) This move is not standard move to answer yours, more like bullying. 3) Disgrace for a 5dan player if this is a teaching game.  BUT, this is not a wrong move; it is more like telling you that the reality is cruel.  HOWEVER, this D10 has a lot of meaning due to the formation of your D13 stone. As you will often notice strong player omitting D13 and kakari at "A".
Xinwen:  Very reasonable that D16 would be better at A / B.  Because if White "A", "1" is not a cut.
Xinwen:  Now you consider the settling is okay?  you made 4 exchanged. did the 4 exchange help you or your opponent?  1 and 2 exchange was bad, and if you erase 1 and 2, it is better that way without the exchange same goes to the 3 and 4.  with 3 and 4, it is very difficult for you to attack at A or B.
Xinwen:  At this point, San ren sei is quite useless. as you're behind.
Xinwen:  Hehe, you're losing.  I think your K4 was actually wanted to "A" and so i would said "B" is slow.  Sometime, you cannot just too obedient to finish up the joseki. when playing with strong player, it is more like Direction and Tolerance.  You have to omit certain move first, to make your shape better. Additionally, 1 is not easy to kill.  Suggestion C
Xinwen:  your group is not strong enough, seem to be settled? the answer is negative.  White has only one running group, and you have 2 weak groups.  I think playing invasion at A would be better for you, as you wouldn't help building the B stronger.  moving at A can live and settled
Xinwen:  Another not useful kind of exchange :-)
Xinwen:  Gote living :-), pain right? hehe, it is okay for white not killing you.
Xinwen:  Hope you do know what's your mistake, i would think that the exchange is wrong.  Sorry i can't review fighting. as i think fighting requires experience and where fuseki + joseki requires study and theory.  In fighting, you must learn your mistake.
Xinwen:  Very good game :-)  I would prefer you to brush up your fuseki and joseki knowledge, as they are the weakest part in your go field.  YES, very correct it is tough for a 9 stones weaker player to win against stronger one in even game. Because often, the stronger one already won the game since fuseki.
M: this move is considered as bad, when there is no white stone near the marked places
M: strange move, without a white stone at A or B
Strange move by white, is this a good move?  ---  M: correct response
Perhaps I could have pushed again to D13; and perhaps could have gone to C13 but that seems like it may have been overplay. Is going to the 3-3 destroying aji or a good way to punish white for his strange play?  --- Pushing would be better here. This way, you strengthen the stones at B, which results with A in place in a weak black group.
to defensive - see variation
Perhaps I should atari other direction? --- No, it's to late now.
This move seemed too slow but I didn't want my stones to be too easily divided. --- correct move, as the proverb says "urgent moves before big moves"  A cut would be severe (but is still possible)
tenuki would be better
Lost move, tenuki would be bigger  But the whole sequence starting with F18 was bad, white did not gain that much, while blacks wall got incredible strong
Is this a good move to tenuki to? Perhaps the situation in the top left is still unresolved. A move by white at D13 would be strong, and allow him to push up to the forth line. I wasn't sure where to tenuki at this point, if I should have had at all.  --- correct, D13 was more urgent
once again the strange sequence
Is there a better response than mine? Perhaps include better variation.  --- No, i like this. Would have played the same.
big move by white
to many cuts open, better sacrifice the 2 stones
good move by white, getting lot of points and making the cuts more severe
black cannot tenuki, cuts still open at top Also it's to early for 3-3 invasion and A would be bigger
unnecessary, lost move, Tenuki at A, B or C would be better
solid and big move, but cuts at top open and urgent
finally white punishs hard to find out, how to defend now properly
wrong side
Here my intention was not to sacrifice stones. Perhaps I should have saved them so I would have greater influence towards the center. Then again, I felt like these stones were also a burden. As a wall, It would have helped me a lot in the center, but letting them die gives white power in the middle.  --- saving them was nearly impossible, at least not without losing something else
I would tenuki instead here. Then it is still Ko. Later, when there are no other big moves, this gets big. But here it is (in my opinion) to early.
Here white made a simple misread.
tenuki would be better - loss of sente Both sides would like to play at bottom here
Why this? wasn't needed - loss of sente
third useless move in a row - not needed
After white's last move, I wasn't sure where to next go to. I wasn't sure if this move was too slow. I think A cut by white in the bottom right could be dangerous, and if the four stones at D6 are captured white could have a lot  more territory. Was this move good, or was there a better place to move?  ---  correct idea
Perhaps I should have protected the cut, but it seemed like the three stones were not too important.  --- they were important, but blacks move at bottom was also good
sacrificing the 3 stones is the easier way, but painful 3-3 is still open
White should have done 3-3 invasion if he was to do this. --- correct
I feel like my response to white's desperate invasion was very sub-optimal. What is a better sequence for capturing white, and do you have any tips?  --- I like your direction. Would have played one above (triangle) myself. The way you played, it's hard to read out, what happens, when white now plays the triangled stone. (threatens cut/running out)  Overall in this situation the direction is correct. You keep keep him from running out, while protecting the side (making points this way on the side, even when your killingattempt fails) There is not enough space to live inside, so white has to start some tricky fight, but looks bad for him.
wasted move - topgroup is already alive, better play A.B or C and connect this way, while cutting off the last small path  to run out
black missed the chance
very aggressive move -  when killing fails black has nothing  and killing is hard, because black isn't very solid at the right
wrong side
again wrong side
black connected, game over
correct move, the rest is just some desperation-plays by white
white completely collapses
A is correct shape and much better
Here if white P18 perhaps the fight would have been decided by semeai; very possible for black to have lost here.  --- wrong, see variation
wrong move
useless, black lifes already
wasted move, white is dead anyways
happygod has resigned the game. Barcarolle: Thank you for the game.  Thanks for reviewing my game, do you have any general tips on areas where I need improvement, or guidelines for me to get stronger, either general or specific? Thanks! - Jeremy  --- You played several useless and small moves, where they were not needed. Ask yourself more often, whether you have to answer your opponents moves or not in semeai. Sometimes the opponent wastes a move, so there is no reason to do the same. Just look, if there is really a move required. On the other hand you should think more often about, what happens with cuts. You missed several times, that white was able to cut you easily. One time he noticed it and the result was fatal. There is no need to protect every cut you have and often the most solid move is not the best. Instead you have to look for moves which make the cut harder (if you cannot prevent the cut, make it hard!) and achieve something else while doing so. A good example was the missed extension in the beginning. (D13)  But generally your fighting technique was really good for your current level.  As i said in the beginning, it's hard to say something about your general weaknesses, but I would suggest you to read something about direction of play. This is usually a topic for more advanced SDK and Dans, but i think it fits for you aswell.  If you like, just look for me on KGS (Username: Mala) so we can discuss other questions or do a teachinggame.  Marc
HollyGo [14k]: hi
Not sure what to play here. Decided to prevent territory growth.
There are 3 common responses to this. o16, r14, q14
Two cuts threatened. Not sure which to cover.
This was played so keep from being surrounded.
Again, just what to play. My F17 group looks possibly surrounded, but I need to cover the cut at s16, so I did.
definitely time to make a run for it.
Now she's taking up big points.
Not my best response. I played n3 just before to cover the corner, now I play q6 and give it away!
Not sure what to play here either.
I'm trying to separate her groups on the bottom side.
I was on the run for awhile there...
I dont know why she didn't cut at k9 kk> she did not want you to join at h9 so this move is logic
Now the d4 group is in trouble.  kk> D4 become critical at this moment...
I find a way out for that group!
While I'm chasing a side group, she's building moyo in the middle... I felt beat at this point....
Why she didn't play s11, I dont know  kk> i think she try to settle the white group by create eye shape...
oh well, I tried to get in there :)
W's H17 group looks lonely.
A major oversight on her part.
Hi there. I played B in this game, and am looking for some guidance in developing my position as well as any other comments you can give me on a local and grand scale. Please concentrate on the "whole board" comments as far as overall positioning is concerned.  Thank you
i think either of marked would have been better then marked moveOnur [?]: C and A is good here. D is a bit big for control, because of w group( R14). A is good but too defensive. For each side, controling middle is wiining point here. So Squares are alternative moves.
Big mistake #1 for B  the following sequence is really bad for BOnur [?]: Lost sente for very little area. Hmm
another blunder
B lost a lot here with possible jump to AOnur [?]: Like i said too big for control. So first you control the sides.
at this point i felt pretty good about B's position. Looked pretty even to meOnur [?]: I draw other diagram at move 68
Onur [?]: Like you see w is not trying to make area. He just trying to break your areas.
Onur [?]: Uhh. Onur [?]: W gaining advantage.
Onur [?]: very little move
at this time i was 100% sure i will win
Onur [?]: This is good you still want to kill that group if he makes a mistake but first you shoul defense something.
that was bigOnur [?]: ...
got luckyOnur [?]: Oh my, yes you are :)
are W killable?Onur [?]: Good tsumego but W is alive..
i feel i did ok thus far in the end game
Onur [?]: ??
I think this move is perhaps quite small. Lots of better looking places to play. What looks best?  //  Well I think P4 is not such bad, because it built up a litte wall while pressing (keep) white down (and put a bit preasure on him).  J3 is too small, K3 seems to be okay (then you play P3 before), because this puts a lot of high pressure on white.  S11 is too small, Q10 and R10 are also okay (but I would prefer R10  a bit more  because it's a bit more save).  K17 is not a good move, I think. J17 is much better, because you can better extend on the right or left side. (see Variations)  C8 is not bad in this situation because you have F3, on the other side it is much more easier when you play C11! (see Variations)  E17 is also okay (see Variations)  You should also keep in mind E16. (see Variations)
I think w R13 is too aggresive.  You have 2 good possiblities.  Play "A" if you want to fight. (see the variations)  Play "B" if you want to play save. (see the variations)
This is too over-concentrated (see the variations before)
"A" is very important here
This is a bad move because it is too small and too over-concentrated (see the variations before).
I guess I could've played somewhere else to stop this, but I did end up building a nice wall on the top.  //  Well the problem is that gaining terretory at the center area is very difficult because you need a lof of stones to get and protect it.  On the outside areas you need much more less stones (especially at the corners).  //  Simply play "A" to live in the corner.
Unfortunately another bad move from black....
This result is very bad for black... (see the variations before)
Keep in mind that playing at "A" is still a good move!
"A" is a key point here...  It is very crucial for black to play at  "A" before playing at "B" or "C" (of course).  I think 'C' is a bit better than "B" because white has a lot of weak spots on the upper left side (triangers). A stone at 'C' surely helps you to get terretory there and puts white under preasure. (see Variation)
I was looking to build some territory on the top here, but with the white stones already underneath my wall, perhaps this was ill-advised. What would be a better way to develop this corner?  //  See the comments and variations before.
Perhaps too close... or perhaps I simply played it out wrong.
Simply playing at "A" in order to put a lot of pressure on the white group.  It's difficult (but possible) for white to live after black have played "A". But black (so or so) will get a lot of terretory.
Miai. White lives. Now I'd like to turn my attention to attacking the marked white stone. How should I approach this.  //  You should play at O1 first (because white has to react on it or he/she will die).  (Keep in mind that Q13 is still a good move, too)  //  I think attacking at "A" is a good way to increase your terretory while putting the white stone under pressure. (See the variations).  Your left group is more or less save (it is easy to live there).
Simply connect at "A".
The result at the bottom is horrible for black....
Looking to contain this white group and increase my influence toward the middle.  //  Well, as I said before playing at "Q13" (intead of P12) is the best move here.
Play at "A" and the group (at least the 3 marked stones) are dead. (see the variations)
It is still possible to kill the hole group (at least the 3 marked stones). (see the variations)
Let us have a short "look around" (even in an ordenary game it is quite useful if you are not under time preasure).  White has a lot of outside terretory (especially on the left).  Well, black has some outside terretory, too. But it is obvious that black mainly concentrates on the center... Unfortunately, white has "A" and can decrease blacks terretory ( it's possible to kill the white group there but it won't be such easy for black).  The circles near the middle are showing the problem of blacks plan.  Black is widely open and need a lof of more stones to create save terretory at the center while white already has a lot of good and save terretory.  So, if black can't kill the white group on the right side he/she will lose!
This seemed ok as a way to undermine white's eyespace.
Perhaps I was too ambitious here. How best to continue the attack?  //  You should attack white with S9 (A) instead of T8 (B). (see the variation before)
Simply extend at "A" before killing.... (in order to prevent a 'ko')
Well, I think "A" or "B" are much better because these moves are much more easier to play than dealing with a ko.  In the end it was one reason why your bottom-right group has been killed.  "A" is playing easy.  "B" is playing a bit more aggresive
I figured it was ok to end the ko fight, since white still didn't have any eyes. Perhaps I should at least have done it one move sooner so my group would have more eyespace.  //  I would play fourther as long as possible in order to catch the marked stones (but on the other hand dealing with KO's isn't easy...).
Suicide.
Cutting to try to mount some kind of counter-attack.  //  Unfortunately, this move does (more or less) nothing, so it's not neccessary to play there...  The black bottom-right group is surely dead.
It seems that black trys to make territory at the center but the problem is that black is still wide open on the left side.  At this moment it makes less sense to go on further with playing because black is too far behind....
Looking to build the 4th side of my center territory.
Sacrifice a stone to improve position for center territory.  //  Good style
Make the center bigger.
I looked hard at all the cutting points for white here to see if I could gain anything, but I didn't find anything. Is there something here I'm missing?  //  Well, there is one little chance at "A" (see the variations)
ight off the bat, I would say you should open up on the star. There is nothing wrong with opening on a 3-4 point, but a 4-4 point means more space.
Heres a good chance to make the point. As of now, white has more influence. The computer is winning by 8.5 moku. However, it's not really a big deal. Just be aware of it.
Tie. For the next move consider O-3. It is closer to the edge, and it's still not too vulnerable.
Again, try to take the 4th line, not the 3rd. The 3rd is more useful in the corners and in closer combat.
Had you stgaked out more area, this move wouldn't have happened.
I think your stronger than the computer. Remember that when you place a stone adjacent to anothe stone like in move 15, you make it stronger. the only reason you didn't lose it ight away is because it was close to the cluster at P-16. Nice job.
PK: this is a move that is too far away from D4 and too far away from R4. Please see variations for more proper moves.
PK: marked is the usual because black doesn't need to worry about D5
n15  this seems awkward  PK: this is over concentrated, not enought points for 5 stones to make.
PK: life for marked stone is the most important. sabaki and life are made in 3rd and 2nd line.
PK: this is a good move
PK: too passive
is it time to invade? and is this the place?  PK: yes and no
better to use this move at, say, m6, to shore up the center?  PK: yes, M6 is better
PK: At this point marked stones are dead and there is no real way to get them alive. the invasion being cut and closed in the center with C11 and the running one-eyed R6 group were the biggest things for white to win.
how would you have done this fight? it worked, but felt precarious.  PK: I added a few variations
PK: marked stones are dead
PK: You lost the game with this move. I will end my review here. I hope the variations give you some help in the future. Remember that it is important to look at the whole board when playing, expecially in the endgame.
yipes
Nanny: Here it is better for black to play A or B. They are dual purpose move. An extension from b's corner and a pincer.
Nanny: So pincer instead of A
Even at this point in the game, should still play A or B
Is this too far?  Nanny: No, that looks fine to me locally.
Nanny: A feels hasty for white Instead, W should play as in variation.   allpotti [8d?]: then, which move is good instead? NannyOgg [-]: for W? maybe K3 NannyOgg [-]: since both corners want to extend there allpotti [8d?]: wait a min NannyOgg [-]: ok allpotti [8d?]: i will be back soon NannyOgg [-]: k allpotti [8d?]: another possible, but more fancy skill is..
Nanny: A is not the correct way to punish white, see variation.
Nanny: A is hitting your head against opponents stones. It is not good shape. After you look at this review, take a look at http://senseis.xmp.net/?HaengMaTutorialForBeginners to help understand the issues for this move.
Is fourth line okay here? If it is correct, what to do in the variation?'  Nanny: I prefer A instead of fourth line
Nanny: A and B would be normal idea for black's next move.
Since my group is already stable, is this too small to play now? Without it, W makes a big corner but in gote. My guess is that the marked stones are one space too far to omit this.  Nanny: A is not a good move here. The problem is that the marked stones are prone to invasion at H3. Black doesn't mind, because black has the sansan invasion (C3) as a backdoor. Once Black plays A and white replies with C3, that backdoor is gone So the shape with A and the marked stones, is bad shape
Here I feel like this move is really only giving me stability.  Nanny: Black feels a bit overconcentrated now, I am not sure.
I can't remember why I played this way. I'll just pretend it was a misclick. ^_^  Nanny S5 actually is quite good move, so don't worry about it.
I think this move should have been aimed at reducing W on the left.
Im not sure what to do here.
I don't want W to play something like o14 and get out easy.
Here I see my two stones being separated from any help so I move to settle.  Nanny: Good idea.
W has caught up on territory now (I think) but has two weak groups to attack. All of my groups are strong so I attack. My goal was to play some splitting attacks on the m15 stones and m7 stones hoping to kill one.  Nanny: Hmmmm, not sure how easy it is to kill one, so try to make profit while attacking. Attacking is usually not to kill, it is to take profit. Killing could be a bonus though :)
Nanny:  black is doing well overall
Nanny: Those three stones have nothing to do with stability of other groups. Just give them up.
Nanny: A is a big mistake. Fatal one.
Here I count W with 48 on the left and 30 on the right. I have B as 30 on the bottom and maybe 10-20 on top. W still has weak groups at A and B and C lives/dies with sente.  I could probably win the game here with some kind of move to seal up my center and trap B. If I failed to kill, I could still expect some thickness on the left to reduce W a little bit.  I think that sealing in 'B' is the largest of the three and killing 'C' is the smallest  Nanny:  I showed triangles for my counts for W, squares for B I get 29+28 = 57 for white + 2.5 for the C group (50 % for live with 5 pts or die) +  6.5 komi   = 66  For black: I counted 30 + 15 for bottom (15 is half of C group, if W kills) (If B to move first, B+25, if W to move first W+5) so 40 + 12 + 7 = 64  But! Like you said, B and A and C are weak or close to death, so the game feels good for B to me. I would play S1 or J13 now, and that seems to seal the game.
Nanny: The game is still good for black.
NannyOgg [-]: just hane? NannyOgg [-]: or nobi? allpotti [8d?]: hane
Nanny: bad move Again, read the Haengma for beginners on senseis library. It will help you a lot.
I realize there is no chance to kill so I take the points on the bottom.
This was terrible but I don't know what else to do.  Nanny: I agree, this feels like a very big thank you move. You help white to make 6th line territory. I really would prefer to kill the bottom right or invade the upper left.
W is dead anyway.  Nanny: yeah, this feels like a pass.
I doesn't look like I can reduce W much so I eat the three stones while W makes the territory.
Since I play here anyway, it might as well be to kill.
Nanny: This is regrettable, white lives.
W played this and left. Maybe he thought he lost? Anyway, unless I am mistaken, I have lost, so I resign.  Thanks again for the review!  Nanny: yes, i agree, W has won here. Maybe he lost connection ^^  My pleasure for the review. Hope it helps more than it hurts.
AP:  Hey there Odif.  My name is Alex Prairie and I will be reviewing your game.  It seems you play the chinese high opening, which I am somewhat unfamiliar with, but I will do my best to comment.  Personally I usually play the chinese low opening.  I hope you enjoy the review.
Odif:is f3 better? AP:  Whenever I play the chinese opening, I play k4 as well.  F3 is another option, based on preference.  Both f3 and k4 are okay but f3 can lead to complications such as a pincer.
AP:  This move isn't very good.  Its okay to cap the middle stone under the chinese low opening, but this stone is now floating and achieving not very much.
Odif: was this okay AP:  I  dont like this move, I would stick to a 1 point jump to Q7
AP:  This move is bad, hes putting himself in the middle of your strength, and on the 4th line, which makes it more difficult fo rhim to make life.
AP:  Not sure about this move, it might be okay, but i would steal his base by playing r4 and then chasing him.
AP:  I would play at S2 instead of O6, in order to keep him struggling for life.  I think the cut at o6 works out, its complicated though, see variation.
Odif: up to here I felt happy, and I had sente.
Odif,: Up until now i felt that I was ok, maybe this is what started to get me into trouble.
Odif: maybe i should just run out and avoid giving white too much thickness  AP:  I like c17, its a fine move
Odif:It seems, that my next few moves only get me into trouble, but I wanted to stop him making an enormous moyo, however, i give lots on left side and damage my lower territory, and set the course for the rest of the game as I get more and more desperate
Odif:this  is not the time for this i think, is there anything better,I was worried about a too big W moyo, this is another crucial turning point.  AP:  Theres a pretty important move to be made at g17, however, if youre going ot make a move in this area, i would personally shoot for d10.  Walking him on the third line doesn't get him very many points, see variation
Odif:my plan, but maybe it is unsound  AP:  This move is a bit loose, lets him invade more easily, but its the right idea for sure
Odif: I didnt expect this  AP:  I dont like this invasion, but i'd have a hard time stopping it so i cant call it bad.  AP:  I think i prefer your move at j4 to the move at k3, but perhaps theres something better, see variation  AP:  I played it out a few times, i dont know how it would work, but perhaps just k3 then tape the corner, as in variation.
Odif:big mistake  AP:  Yes, but this is one i might make too, easy to miss.  In the variation I show a way that you can get something out of your cut at d5
Odif: Im getting desperate now, I want some compensation  AP:  instead of c9, see the variation i gave earlier for this cut
Odif:right side to block I think  AP:  Yeah this seems right
AP:  You can play at o17 or p17 earlier if you would like, see variation
Odif: wrong direction?
AP:  Instead of this variation is a bit safer, but u dont get the outside influence, its a trade off
AP:  Good job on this group, u did well getting a ko
Odif:bad move from me  AP:  Yes e18 was too important to pass up unfortunately
AP:  I like this strategy killing the middle white stones, but it looks like m18 is still important
AP: I believe the variation works
AP:  This move is bad for white, variation is better.
Odif:empty triangle  AP:  This empty triantle seems fine, not all empty triangles are bad
Odif:I hoped for something like the variation, leaving me a chance to try to kill k12 group
In variation, while white makes eyes, you can take the left side group
Odif:he missed it too
Odif: g8 kills B  AP:  Correct, black can live on G8 though
Odif:no
Odif:I resign here, I missed many opportunities in this game, but after having played several bad moves, i was in desperation all or nothing mode and I missed my chances to punish his mistakes.  AP:  Most of your moves are good, you seemed to have lost the games on your mistakes.    Your fuseki seems fine, but if you want to learn the chinese Fuseki very well, try reading "The Chinese Opening" By Masao Kato.  I read it, and it helped a lot.  If you have anymore questions, you can talk to me on kgs, hope you enjoyed the review
P: it's so far from the three stones?  J: Yes, this is too far. Your opponent played joseki and is strong here. You should hold back a line. If a fight breaks out near here, you may find yourself needing to add stones you may not otherwise need to add. It is about stone efficiency.
P: Its so little. I think not because it threat L17  J: L17 isn't much more than what you were previously threatening in this area. Later in the game you could slide to K18 from G17. White needs another move here to secure territory, but it is not urgent. J18 here is more of an endgame move. A move from the other side at B16 secures the corner, and threatens C12. I think this is much bigger.
P: Now I think h4 is better  J: This move and L3 are the common responses to a "shoulder hit" like L4. This move is fine.
J: M2 would be normal. It strengthens your 2 stones and deprives white of a base at the same time.
J: This is a "thank you" move for white. It allows white to cut your position, while both sides are left with defects. See variation.
J: This knife through your stones is painful. It could have been avoided with M2 earlier.
J: You can sacrafice a stone here by playing O4 to get a bigger corner. See variations.
J: Letting white get a strong group here leads to many problems later in the game.
J: The result from this play allows white to attack your thinness. While you get the corner. You may have wanted to consider a slide to S16 to strengthen and expand your territory while attacking white. See variation.
J: Seems better to play at P14. A play by white at Q14 followed by R13 could lead to problems later. See variation.
R7?  J: R7 seems too timid. I would play Q8 as well.
J: Since your corner is open from the bottom, this seems to be the only move. See variation.
J: I think P10 has a better feel, but this can work. See variation.
J: You run into serious shape problems here. Your stones in this area are suffering and you need to let something go. This is where you lose the game.
J: This needs to be at O12 to prevent white from playing there. This will help fix your shape.
J: White can live here easily by cutting at Q14. O13 just makes your stones heavy.  A white play at N12 gives you 2 problem groups.
J: Game seems over at this point. White has no weak groups and your territory can still be reduced in many areas. (eg. Q2, B2, K1, B17)
J: Very risky, but you are behind. Normally you would pull out to prevent white from having his way with a weak group.
J: Should be H2. See variation.
J: There is no clear way to save these stones that I see.
blas [4k]: thx rgw [4k]: Thanks  J: Not a lot went your way this game. Allowing white to get a solid group (L4 group) in the middle of your strength made fighting difficult. In the fight that ruined you on the right side, you were scrambling to work with weak groups with poor shape. In these fights you need to be more mindful of the strength of groups and patiently let your opponent get what he deserves. I hope this helps! -Joe KGS & IGS: schmee
(FR) Is f3 ok for kakari or was C15/D15 better?  (Yan) There is no better or worse at this point.  It's personal preference.
(FR) Wasn't J3 better?  (Yan) H4 is good.  F5 is an influence move, so your H4 is good for counter influence(and works well with your Q3 stone).  You can also consider C3 and settle for territory.  That's one of the more common josekis.
(Yan) O4 is a bit too greedy.  White can m3 and p3 later on and destory all the territory you have at the bottom.  O3 leaves no aji and therefore is a more solid move.
(FR) Preparing to invade R9.  (Yan) Good!  You also expand your moyo on top.  Two birds in one stone, very efficient.
(Yan) Big but not urgent move for white.  P11 is better.
(Yan) Hmmm. The aji at R8 is gone after you played this move.
(Yan) Q12 is really bad.  Simply Q11 is much better.  Q12 is gote move.
(FR) Now I'm not sure about R8. Wasn't it aji-keshi? Was tennuki better?
(FR) In the game I played K5. Was this proper way to deal with L4?  (Yan) Since you are pretty weak here.  You want to make yourselve stronger.  This is the time to play some contact move, for example K4, or even D2 and see how while responds.  To give you an idea, I will play D2 and it will result in some sort of exchange.
(Yan) I would L6 instead.  Force white to your strong right corner.
(Yan) K3 for b would be a good forcing move.  Hard for white to ignore...
(Yan) Bad shape so you are going to get very heavy.  I would consider H3.
(Yan) not sure what you are trying to do here.  You want to stay away from White's strong group for now.
(FR) I think, that saving F3 is small. Am I right?
(Yan) I would consider D15 or C15.  It's not a good idea to exchange big moyo with big territory.  Big frameworks are very heavy and white can treat invasion lightly after he's got enough territory.
(Yan) white is very solid on the left now.
(Yan) Should be Q17.  You are too strong here to let white live so easily.  :-)
(FR) Were there more aggressive ways to attack O15 group? Are variations, starting from M15 better?  (Yan) In this case you want to attack slowly.  You will gain the most by attacking slowly.  The purpose is never to kill.  The purpose it to win.  I think M12 is good and then somewhere around E15.  You want to build up your strength and then attack.  White cannot run that fast.  His group is really weak.
(FR) Here, I'm not sure about proper direction of attack. In the game I thought about moves around F13, but was afraid of  the weakening of my own K6 group. Now I think, it was even better to invade the left side. What do You think about it? Is starting around C7 ok?  (Yan) Again you won't be able to gain much by attacking so fast.
(FR) So, I have connected...
(FR) Wasn't G13 better?
(Yan) Not necessary for now.  O9 to gain some points.
(FR) Was E17 bigger?
(Yan) E6 is better.  You take sente.
(FR) Misread :(
(FR) Yeh, another endgame mistake :(
I dislike Sanrensei so I always dive in there as soon as I can  JJ: You must not be afraid of sanrensei
JJ: This is a good move too for black, very influence-oriented
Was actually considering responding with O3  JJ: With Q10 you can punish him for entering there
JJ: Wrong direction I think
JJ: Noy a good move. You are helping him to strengthen his formation
JJ: Good move from Black
are there any bigger moves than this?  JJ: Those ones were bigger. Letting him connects to that stone is not a problem at this stage of the game
JJ: BAD MOVE :( You are inviting him to cut your stones!!
Is this good for W?  JJ: No, you helped him to strengthen his corner
JJ: Same as the previous move
JJ: And again
JJ: Now you have got problems
JJ: Bad move, you are just letting him connect his stones for free
JJ: Very small move :(
JJ: Small too
JJ: This kind of move is better when you already have a stone on K16 or K17, else you will surelly end in gote
JJ: Bad direction I think
JJ: You see? you ended the secuence in gote ;)
JJ: It's an overplay, be careful because overplays normally help your opponent
JJ: This is bad shape
JJ: Not necessary
JJ: Now you are in problems again
JJ: Only move
How could I compensate for this Ko loss?
All these moves just helped him
JJ: ?
JJ: Bad move :(
Any larger threats? Is this even a good threat?  JJ: Not even a threat, I fear :(
Any more point in W continuing?  JJ: Well, game was over when white lost that ko, but sometimes is good to continue fighting to the end to reduce the losts (it can help you to improve your yose skills)
JJ: Bad move!!
JJ: Very bad move, you had him in this fight :(
Khonsu [9k]: Thank you for the game
Mera [6k?]: hi
rs220675: P4 is very important. Don't let blacks K4 settle to easy.
rs220675: good.
rs220675: This move is good in itself, but if you see the whole board you'll notice a weakness between your stones D4 and C10. If black invades there - which he did - then you have not trouble, but you are in defense and have to react. That's not good considering black's moyo on top. So play at A to D (all good possibilities) to strengthen your weak stones.
rs220675: Not a good move. You have to take care of C6 first. Also your move at H4 can be cut off very easily by black. Remember: If you connect your stones, you'll be fine even if you don't look at territory. Most games at your level are lost because someone kills big groups and that cannot happen if you look to connect your stones resp. not having weak groups. And here you create THREE weak groups: D4, C10 and H4.  Better play at A or B.
rs220675: Black does you a favour by not cutting.
rs220675: That move is too small. Look at your board and how many big moves there are still possible like at A or B. Moves like that make a lot more points at the end then your move. If it's not a necessary move to survive or avoid weak groups then ALWAYS go BIG.
rs220675: Ok, but a bit small again considering black plays at A or B. Look at variation....
rs220675: Too small again. Don't hang too much on C10. You can easily sacrifice this stone when you are able to make other big moves.
rs220675: A classical mistake I also did when I was weaker: To hang too much on weak stones instead of sacrificing them. At A would have been the better move.
rs220675: Well, now you live there on the left side, but black is big on the top.
options88 [7k]: that wa a accidental drop
rs220675: Black played some weak moves in your favour. Now I wouldn't play R 17, because of what would happen...see variation.  Better play at A, B or C. Later you can still invade at R 17 and C17.
rs220675: Ok the rest of the game there have been too many mistakes, so I end here. What you need to do is play bigger moves in the beginning of the game.  When considering a move then ask:  1. Is it necessary to live or avoid heavily weak groups? then play there.  2. If it's not necessary to live or cause heavily weak groups then play a big move instead.
Mera [7k?]: thx options88 [7k]: it is not right to resign at this stage
Ragamuffin: Hi!
Parsec: Hi Ragamuffin: Hi Parsec: Good Game!
Ragamuffin: You also. Good luck
This move is unorthodox. White will usually play around Q4.
Every move must have a purpose. In this case, I do not see a purpose for Black 5. It is better for Black to claim the last corner. Recall the proverb, "corners, sides, then center."
The last corner is still open.
Unnecessary. There are bigger points ont he board.
Excellent. Who cares about two stones when you have a claim on half the board?
Black should at least play H4. Playing this low is unnecessary.
Black should play P7 for shicho.
Black has nothing to worry about here. Tenuki is better.
Unnecessary. Black should play G4.
This should be at E2 or E3.
Maybe Black would do well to consider the upper left area of the board.
Unnecessary. Black is safe here.
Also unnecessary. Consider the upper left area.
Capturing was a wasted move. Black could have continued to invade or reduce.
Again, it was unnecessary for Black to capture.
Try keima.
As Black could not live, it was unwise to play here.
This move is unnecessary. It is only needed when just the marked stones are in isolation.
This is when white attack started  Jeff: Black should have played at S15 for shicho.
I closed a "hole" to prevent other attack
Tried to block white expansion
Maybe I should've played Q18 instead of Q17?
Lost BIG territory!!!
Black cannot live here.
Black cannot live here.
I decided to open on the corner, since that's what I'm best at.
I decided to approach on the fourth line (to see what happened).  Asubaba : To make a kakari against the stones at Q16 and D4 is miai, When there is a miai most of the times it is better to wait for the exact moment, instead a kakari at P3 or P4 seems to be more important at the moment if black plays there he will be very strong
Jumping out seemed like the best choice (I wasn't too worried about the push at C7 - should I have been?)  B7 is not a good choice it leads to two cutting points in whites shape
This move surprised me slightly; seemed slightly submissive for black.  You are right C7 is much more active
Had to extend toward my 4-4 stone (maybe extend higher?).  C14 or C13 is better; when to extend to have all of the stones at the same level is not so good ( in your case black can attack from underneath ), for extension a wave shape is better ( one stone at fourth line one at thirth line )
Now it seems like I have a loose moyo, though I was worried about any potential reductions.  All of your stones are at fourth line so you are right to worry for an attack
This move is sente for bllack because white have a weakness at F17, black makes more territory at these moves
I didn't like the wall he was forming, but I'm not sure if more jumping followed by a hard invasion would have worked.
Was worried about getting my H4 stone cut off - it seemed rather weak compared to the black group (though it would still have aji anyway).
Black got the territorial move first!
This move is weird, black can not attack white stones by this way
This was meant to cut black into two groups.  These moves from both side do not make any territory, do not forget that Go is about making territory
How to respond to this stone?
Here you lose the chance to enter blacks moyo
You are attacking for one stone, this stone is not an important stone
These stones are not important also, do not attack or save unimportant stones!
I'm not sure if this was a good time to invade or not.  Both off you forget to invade, instead both of you kill many aji at the borderline
Do not cut two strong groups apart, cut only if you can create weak groups!  Still you may have a chance to invade although after 3-3 invasion the chance gets smaller
That seemed like a waste of moves - hence why I abandoned it.  You spend too many moves before abondoning, and your small chance to enter in to the moyo gets smaller and smaller as black gets stronger and stronger inside
Was there any way to kill the small black group?  Now you don't have any other way, it is too late
Too late for an invasion!
AKeshi [18k]: Sneaky snake
At this point I thought it was over, but black agreed to try out the M-line snake to see what happens.
We abandoned because it was clearly dead.
JS: Interesting, I think that Black already has a little advantage here because he got the vital point of the low Chinese Opening of White at the top which is also a vital point for Black's Sanrensei.
JS: Generally speaking one should not start some small scale fighting when there are still big poings left on the board. Open space is what is called for. There is so much open space on the lower side around A, so why should it be good to start an unvafourable battle at the top left.  I just think bottom is more important now. After the bigger fights at the bottom become settled somehow you can judge better what to do at the top left.
G: I wanted to solidify my group because of the C11 white stone, but this move ends up in a poor result for black because of the peep; should I have played at A?  JS: Yes I think A would have been better. But remember, you cannot hope for a good result in this corner because you were already pincered. That is one aspect of the Chinese opening. It lets the opponent a hole to come in, but if he does, he gets attacked heavily.
JS: after this it is hard to find a good continuation for Black because the upper White group is totally secure. However, what I always think of how to explain something in reviews is the following: There is always someone who is attacking, lets call him the hunter, and someone who is defending, lets call him the prey. But sometimes the hunter becomes the one hunted! So if you want to become hunter or prey is up to you :-). Lets look at the actual situation: The marked Black stones maybe not that strong, but are they really weaker than the White stone at A? Look at the variation.
JS: This move just says: "Please, don't kill me, just give me 2 eyes!"; unfortunately this move also makes bad shape. You know the empty triangle is something one only plays when there is absolutely no other way.
G: this hurts  JS: Yes, what is even more emberassing is, that the marked White stone can still escape at A, connecting either up or down
JS: Good point for White, Black should have taken this just bofore beginning the fight in the top left.
JS: This is also very good point for Black expanding his own moyo and reducing the opponent's, with the invasion in the lower left is still possible.
JS: This cut seems a little bit unreasonable because it maybe only ending in Black having a weak group to look at. Look at the variation.
G: I feel like white has let me in peace, here  JS: White played good here, keeping distance from the group she wants to attack.  Remember, killing a group is not the same as attacking it. After White settles her groups on the left, the Black and White group in the center started to run into the Black moyo. This is not really what Black wanted to do.
JS: This White move is too heavy and leaves the Black peep at A. Look at the variation.
JS: Good move from Black.
JS: The White group becomes heavier and heavier while Black gets more and more stones surrounding the whole right side.
JS: Good move from Black.
G: is hane better?  JS: In this position Black maybe will get a little bit bad aji because White become the possibility of peeping at the cut A. Therefore Black can also play hane, see variation.
G: the sequence ended bad for black, but there must be something to do in this corner...  JS: In the corner the submarine move at A looks interesting, but at the overall position it is much bigger to secure the top right corner first.
JS: Securing this 4 white stones is just a small endgame move because after Black captures White can capture back. Simply connection her stones at A would be better for White.
G: should be at A I think, now. It would separate the two white groups, continuing the fight.
G: Now this is really big.
G I also thought about A  JS: Yes, I think A is bigger now.
G: I answered submissively to this move. But I don't really know what to do. A, B, C, maybe, but the white center group is now very strong, so I'm reluctant to  play so close to it.
G: could be at A, there is no danger... or maybe I can play elsewhere (B)? Anyway, this is the last move, since after this is the endgame and I am unsure about the order of moves. The game was close in the end. White made an endgame mistake, losing 4 stones, and Black won by 2 points.  JS: I think B is still the biggest point on the board because it has good continuations to slide into the white position. The value of a move at C is also very high.  Thank you for reviewing your game and keep playing this game having more attention to look at the whole board :-).
I'm not sure where to go from here.  kklim> r10 or near by area; or k17 area you may consider.
Is this a reasonable attachment?  kklim> based on white have stone group on the left, and can place one more stone at g3, it is resonable move.
He didn't take my stone at H4, I eventually saved it on move 58, but I can't figure out why he ignored it.
The next 9 or 10 moves invlove fighting for dominance in the center. I think I lost a lot of ground here. What would have been a better option for me?
At this point, I felt that I was going to lose. I asked for other DGS players to look over the game and let me know if I should resign, several said that there were significant opportunities for both players to gain ground. I knew that was the case for black (and he eventually took my right corner,) but I didn't see any significant opportunities for me..  kklim> slightly under hand at this moment, it mean nothing. your competitor may have wrong move and you can turn the situation, no to mention endgame still lot of fighting yet. do not give up.
Would F6 have been a better choice for me here?
Did I handle the corner OK? I probably should have played R3 myself at some earler point in the game, but when?
The next 20 moves invloved a significant invasion into blacks teretory. Could I have done better?
I eventually came close to killing blacks stones at the bottom center, could I have done so if I had pressed the attack here?
I felt I handled the next 14 moves quite well. Is that accurate, or did I miss some opportunity for a big gain?
Why didn't he capture my stone here? Was that a mis-step on his part?  kklim> maybe
Perhaps too soon but I wanted to experiment.
again there is absolutely nothing wrong just by blocking
the result from this sequence look favorable for black, since black got a pretty wall and white still left weakness at 'a' good job
nice
Proper attacking move?  this look okay,
i'll be happy if my opponent play this way, since white hvn't settle his group at bottom centre, yet she trying to create another group, whatever result will therefore not good for her
Is there a stronger response? this move look okay
this is solid move
good , now you can see that thickness is very usefull for attack, you can get this because white has too many weak group to protect. in same situation try building thickness by attacking 1 group, then attack with the thickness you just build so that other group will surely suffer. this method has a drawback if they ignore your move then your whole plan will be in ruin. so make sure you can get enough compensate if they ignore your move. this often involve life and death problem so alot of practise will definitely improve your strength and also your planning.
what about a
anyway the result is good for black
i can see that you think you leading, so you are playing safely, but this kind of move should be instictive since this move make a good shape
yup
again 'a' should hv been the most natural responds
1 point for white and white got sente
I would like to know general areas that I could improve in (of course in addition to the life and death in the corner) and better moves I could have made. Are there any books you recommend? Again, thanks for reviewing my game! Jeremy W j3r3mee@yahoo.com  generally you like to play safe,which is also pretty much my style. you still lack of instict for good shape. and always remember to think of hane or block first in life and death situation. also if you meet player that like to play wild just play safe which is your style and slowly they will fall on their own.  Lee Changho is a brilliant master that like to play simple, you can have a look for his game for fun and practise simple life and death so you wont fall for tricky player trick. and also try to count how much you lose and how much you gain during yose since you lose quite alot of points there.  cheers  hv fun playing go
-H-: This looks too one-sided to me.  I would rather approach the top left corner at F17.
LL: In what direction should White play?  -H-: B is a good way to get into the top side.
LL: This move seems a little too slow, and also, it allows Black to build a large moyo.  -H-: Yes, exactly.  White seems content with a too small part of the board.
-H-: I think that with D10 and Q10 in place, a high move at J16 would be a little more consistent.  But anyway, Black is doing very well now.
LL: A mistake? This move seems to small at this stage.  -H-: Yes, it does not address White's problems.  It is rather like endgame in character.
-H-: This is a little slow in my opinion.  Black already has a moyo here, and this move only defends that.  Black should try to expand even more.  P8 or E6 come to my mind.
-H-: Black should defend the right side, at Q14.  White will still be under pressure (see variation).
LL: Which shape to play now?  -H-: F would be my first idea, although O14 (slow but thick) or A have merit too.
-H-: E16 would make it much more difficult for White to get a foothold now.
-H-: I like this better than your variation.
-H-: At this point, I would be tempted to make things a bit more interesting by trying to break up the left side.
-H-: Now, White is more or less forced to be content with the corner.  It will be difficult to keep up with Black's outside prospects.
-H-: I think that Black should take the outside in sente here (see variation).
-H-: Is it really necessary?  Is E15 not more urgent?
(Markings by LL)  -H-: I think that you should think about R3 too.
-H-: Black could get a bit more with R2 (see variation).
-H-:  Do you really need this?  White should be alive, especially taking into account the black weaknesses at o9 and r13.  White needs to reduce the moyo on the left now, otherwise the game is practically over.
-H-:  This may be the wrong direction now, E6 is more important.
-H-:  White could try to turn the tables by taking E6 himself.
-H-: Now the game is practically decided.  Black is ahead on both points and thickness.
-H-:  Have you read out that you need this?  White does not have time for this.
LL: Very good placement! White should have protected this area before.  Now, the position is difficult.
LL: Good move, I missed it! The situation has become horrible for White.
LL: Black has now a winning position.
This is fine I think.  Maybe F17.  See variations on moves 2 to 6 for some other ideas.
This is too slow.  Black should now play K4 or H17 and white is way behind in the moyo race.    White will invariably leave weaknesses behind in a handicap game, so leaving C12 weak at this point is not terrible.
This is black's first mistake.  The timing of this move is bad as there are bigger moves available, like H17 and K4.  More importantly, the sequences that follows gives white exactly what he needs in this game, thickness.  It is more common for black to develop thickness early on, so helping white build it now will help white to recoup the handicap stones.
White does well here by ending in sente, and the black mistake is revealed in the thickness of whites position. Furhter, white getting sente is never good in a handicap game.
A good extension for white.
This is very bad.  It is low, on the 2nd line.  Also, the potential for invading at the 3x3 point, R17, is erased, and that could be worth 20 plus points later on.    See variations for other options.
Black is very kind to white here.  bK4 for instance is alot more valuable at the moment.  Black can come back to R17 later.
Joseki are not always applicable to the whole board situation.  Neither M16 or L17 adequately use the white thickness on the left.  See variation.  M16 does a reasonable job of working with the F16 stones, but white has better.
J16 is an invasion.  It is alone against 3 stones to the right and 9 very strong stones to the left.  Attack the invading stone.    N14 seems to be trying to secure the O17 stones from the threat of J16, but they are not under attack.  J16 is.  See variations
With N14 in place, the cap at K14 is better.  To kill something, you must first contain it, so repventing center access is more important than making eye space reducing moves.  In addition, a moe like K14 provides a loose connection between your strong F16 group and the M16 group, which later on would have been helpful.
It is debatable whether white should leave off the attack on J14 for now, or not.  Black is not out of danger yet, but there are other things for white to do, like the move you played.    White should be aiming to exploit the weakness of the J14 group on a large scale by creating thickness around the F6 area, so that white can "push" the J14 group towards it, and hopefully kill.
White is right on track to try and kill J14 soon.
See alternate continuations to see that white has no worry about K3 being disconnected, so G5 seems playable here.
I feel this is too loose.  bJ3 or bL3 are hard to deal with.  See variations
White has a really nice way to fix all the weaknesses around here.  see variation.
White has better ways to connect that also form eyes.
The timing of this is questionable.  The process of making life in the corner will strengthen black in the surrounding area, which will put more pressure on the K3 group.  The K3 group is not alive yet, so helping black build strength near it is probably not a great idea.    Perhaps a move like M8, and sequence aiming for another eye in the center should come first.
Now black recognizes the threat R5 poses, so he captures it.  Part of the advantage white has in a handi game is that black does not always see everything that white sees, so helping black to see the bad things you can do to him gives away some of yoru advantage.
As you have noted, living is more important here.  Plainly the points involved here, roughly 30, make it clear that white should just live with Q2 instead of O5.    Another way to see this is that O5 seeks to save the cutting stone P4.  Saving P4 lets white attack the O3 group.  However, once black plays Q2, the O3 group is alive, so the cutting stone P4 no longer has any influence on the situation.  Saving it becomes pointless.  By this logic, making life with Q2 actually makes the cutting P4 a meaningful cutting stone in addition to making life in the corner.      Further, the fact white can save the P4 stone makes Q2 sente for white.  White first lives in the corner, and then retains sente if black fixes at O5, or if black does not fix, white gets a great attack against the O3 stones by playing O5 himself.
White's corner dies here.  I don't believe there is even a ko for life available here.
This is correct.  White has died in the corner, and has no reason to play there any longer.  Ensuring life for the K3 group is more important.  I should stress that this is not an attack on the O3 stones.  White can't even win a capturing race: the O3 group has 6 liberties and an eye while and R3 has 4 liberties and a potential eye.  Hence, O3 are too strong to be attacked.
Now I've lost that corner.    The corner was lost with bQ2.  Black is in fact wasting a move here.
Making eye shape for this group is important, but if you manage to kill the J16 group, making eye shape would be ultimately useless.  An attack at J12 seems to be a better way for white to proceed here.
The wrong direction.  White has many stone around here, and they are pretty strong.  White can afford to be aggressive.   see variation
This is a very meek way to proceed.  Black has all but connected J14 F13 and H9 together.   It is always harder to attack connected groups.     Protecting ones established territory is important, but White does not have enough territory to make simply guarding it a viable strategy.  White should pursue an attack as outlined in the recent variations.
G12 and H14 are miai, moves that are paired.  If black cuts at H14, white can connect again with G12.  If black saves his stones with G12, then white can connect with H14.  White need play neither as no matter what black does, white has the other to fall back on.  White can press the attack here instead of meekly connecting.
Black's groups are all connected now, and white no longer has an attack on either.  In fact, the one under attack now is white.  O17 is not for sure alive yet, and K3 seems to need another move.  Attacking the weak black groups helped to strengthen all the white groups around them, especially if you end up killing one.
A wasted move.  White should not hope to connect the L5 group to the O17 group.  White also has no prospects for territory around O8.  This move is almost a pass by white.    White has some aji (potential) around R9 that O8 could help to exploit, but the continuation is long and comlicated.  A move like S12 clearly threatens another move against the black R17 group, and so as an end game move, it is likely a better move as it is sente.
The ladder might favour white, but ladders aren't the only way to capture.  Black is clearly storng here, so white can be captured in a net pretty easily.  This will end up as a donation to black.
All the moves since O8 to here have been smaller than S12.  Both players have missed this important point till now.    An attack on the black R17 group could probably be used to help the white O17 group live, so white has not only given black many points, but missed an opportunity to live for sure with O3.
This is just points now.  White has connected O17 to K3 through the middle, and each group has one eye, so together they are alive.  P9 is just a waste of sente to gain about 5 points.    If C3 works as an invasion, it would surely be worth more than 5points, and there are other moves besides for white.
I tried connecting rather than use the 3-3 invasion.  I don't know what's better here.  The attachment here does not work, black is too strong there.  Attachment stones are akways at a disadvantage in terms of liberties, so invasions usually do not involve attachments, unless you plan to sacrifice the attaching stone.  See variations for some other ideas.
This wastes the aji white can use at B5.  See variation.
White should at this point leave F1 for later.  E7 very clearly kills C9.  C9 has no eye space, so it can only live if C7 dies.  Connecting is worth huge points.
White still has a chance to win the fight on the left, but an attempt must be made.  If C7 dies, then black has won for sure, but if C9 dies, then white has a good chance to win.  See variation
I think I needed this move to save my group and kill B in my area.  Ya, I agree.
this move is strange.... its used in a different joseki normally. (see first variation) but here it should be played at R15
same mistake as up top... should be at p3 now
AGAIN! this move should be at e17!
too close to your wall and too easy for white
too easy on white because it can allow him more room to run around with
this is okay in this situation because you want to close off and protect your own group. however if your group isnt under any real threat of death from b11 or there isnt a really painful followup for you then you shouldnt just answer this way otherwise white will easiy win the endgame.  comments end here, i think the game is already decied and its only small endgame from here on.  hope it helps!
[krinid] This wasn't necessary.
[krinid] Not necessary.
[krinid] Not necessary.  In fact, it helps him with his attempt to create seki.
iSoma: I think this move is the more agressive to A . But invites to W play B?  Alex: Right, F16 is a mistake, because white has a good attack at B17.  You should play either 'A' or 'C' (E16).
iSoma: Somehow I thought stealing White C7 would be good here.  Alex: It's a good idea--but C7 doesn't have a big effect on white.  I think 'a' (C8) would be better instead, aiming to invade at 'b' (C12).
iSoma: I dont like to play againt big frameworks. Wasnt thinking much for this move.  Alex: Personally I don't like this move, because it tries to make influence--but the white stone at Q4 will neutralise any thickness that you make.  Instead I would choose one of 'a' (O16), 'b' (O17), 'c' (R12) or maybe 'd' (Q11).  See variation for an example.
iSoma: As expected.
iSoma: Don't now many josekis well. Played fast, wasnt really sure if thats possible, but wanted to keep pressure. A better according to joseki?  Alex: Yes, this is a bad mistake--either N16 or N15 would be better--take a look at the variation.
Alex: Here is an example of a slow move.  This is the type of move that you should save for the endgame--it's only a few points, not important this early in the game.  See the variation.
iSoma: Thought I already have to corner, so it might good too press here.  Alex: No, attacking the H17 stone won't work well, because your corner shape is too weak.  You should play 'a' (F17) instead--see the variation.
Alex: Right.  You'd like to play 'a' (E16) instead, but it doesn't work (variation).
iSoma: I was willing to sacrifize F16. Wasnt really sure if this K4 move is any good.  Alex: K4 is not bad, but my preference is for R6 instead.  The reason is that you already played a high move at Q10, so the shape is incomplete--you want to turn the right side into a framework.
iSoma: I thought i was thick enough at top right. So give K4 some sense.  Alex: Good idea.  Maybe you could think abut R3 instead--see variation--it's hard to decide which way is better.
Alex: The three stones D4-C7-F3 make an awkward shape: white can still invade at 'a' (C3).  Maybe you should play 'b' (E3) instead.
iSoma: I thought it might not be too bad to extend here.  Alex: The problem with this move is that you can't really attack the white stone: white can always play 'a' (O2) to connect.  So maybe you should consider attaching on top--see the variation.
Alex: This is a very slow move: you can't make much territory in that area.  Maybe 'a' (M7) instead?
iSoma: I thought pushing to center is bigger than defending at bottom.  Alex: Yes.  But I still prefer M7.
Alex: This is "aji-keshi" (spoiling your potential)--you make white's corner stronger.  If you leave the corner alone, then later you might have a chance to invade at 'a' (R5).  Also, this move is gote for you.  If you really want to play in this area, 'b' (P2) is a better move--see variation.
Alex: I think this is a mistake by white, as black's corner ends up strong--white loses the chance to invade at 'a' (C3) (another example of aji-keshi).
iSoma: F4 better?  Alex: I'm not sure--it's hard to decide.  I think this way is probably better--if you play F4 instead, then white might be able to clamp at 'a' (D2) later.
Alex: This is another slow move, defending only a small amount of territory.  Maybe 'a' (D9) instead?  If you do want to defend this area, 'b' (S9) is better, as it keeps sente--see variation.
iSoma: W is getting big...
Alex: I think this is too defensive.  Maybe G10 instead?  See variations.
iSoma: I thought if W plays around H14 he's getting to big.  Alex: True, but this move is going in too deep.  I think you were lucky that white didn't attack strongly...  Instead, maybe you should play at J13 (variation).
Alex: Good move!
Alex: I think this is a mistake by white (too slow!)--if 'a' (J10) instead, black could end up in big trouble.
iSoma: I wanted to play sabaki here. Dunno if really possible. Played fast.  Alex: This is very risky!  Again I don't think white found the best way to attack.  I would play 'a' (J11) instead.
Alex: White could play D10 instead to start a large scale fight--see variation.
iSoma: I believed in a chance.  Alex: This is a thin shape--your three stones at D11 are likely to get captured anyway--but you have no choice.
iSoma: Run... :)  Alex: Yes, it's the only way now!
Alex: Good move.
iSoma: O17 felt strong but I wanted to help O5 group.  Alex: I wonder if Q9 is better--see variation.
Alex: Q5 is better, because it keeps sente--white must reply (see variation).
Alex: Good move.  (You didn't play O6, because it would be too slow, right?)
iSoma: Too easy? Don't know really.  Alex: It's a nice idea, but here I think H12 is better, as it makes it more difficult for white to capture the D11 stones.  See variation.  Therefore I think white H13 is a mistake.
Alex: I don't understand why white didn't play F11 (variation).
iSoma: Didnt really know if that exchange was so good for me but i didnt liked W to enter my territory rather than bring 4 stones alive.  Alex: I think this is OK, but maybe you can play 'a' (R1) first--it's sente (white must reply)--see variation.
iSoma: H17 bigger?  Alex: You mean H7?  Yes.  Actually, 'a' (H8) is even bigger.  And 'b' (R1).
iSoma: I just tried to play sente moves from now on. I wasnt sure I was winning I just knew it was close.  I knew I would have lost playing even, but not sure if there is any major errors? This is my last comment. Thanks.  Alex: Since the endgame is close, I've commented on a couple of later moves...
Alex: 'a' (B15) is better--it's sente!
Alex: Good move!
Alex: 'a' (H19) is bigger, because it threatens to follow up at 'b' (K19)--see variation.
Alex: I don't think this is necessary.
Alex: You should play 'a' (C8) first (sente!)  Last comment.
now, this black stone is suboptimal, and the first direction of play comment comes here:  Either A or B are big here, and much bigger than what black played.
This move is OK, but there in not so much hurry with this, since black can simply extend to the other side, and come close to your other corner
This feels small.  If you instead consider the left side, you have actually now invested two stones in a loose wall, so you could think that something is cooking there.  Even more than with only the 4-4 stone in place.  D15 is still the move that helps there.  Direction of play is just trying to remember what you have already played, and play new stones so that they work together with the old ones.
But now of course it is too late.  This is a good move.  Now black has built a similar influence on the top side, and white needs to intervene (as happened).
A good move, building a framework for black
This move feels a bit like a mistake in direction of play.  This way of course makes white live, but the variation looks better-  Here, direction of play and joseki knowledge are both needed.  White wants to build something around A or a wall facing towards the stone below.  This way the strength of the right bottom corner helps to make the right side whites.
This move protects the corner (from black A) and is big, naturally.  White has, however, about the same amount of territory as black, but much less influence, so perhaps B would be also possible, or even better.
This move protects the corner territory.  But now you actually help black build a huge left side, which is bad.  A pincer would prevent that.
So far black has played the opening very well.  White has taken much more points than black, but black has lots of potential territory around, and the upper left black framework is huge.  White's opening can be thought of as slow, perhaps.  My advice for white in the opening is to try to look for places of extensions more.  In the beginning, D15, and later, D10 were really big points that white missed, playing more securely instead.
This is good, trying to get up towards the center.
Here, getting up is more important than going for the base.
Now, white got the stones (marked with at triangle) as in the variation of 34, but the exchange of the stones with a square has removed the possibility of trying to cut black later  Black G4 - White F4 is, on the other hand bad for black, as it just made white stronger
This is a mistake from black.
The area up left from the string of triangles is now very strongly under black's influence.  This is an invasion deeply inside black's area, and in such a place that it is both difficult to make a base, and difficult to run to safety  Consider the other points.  A-C try to make life, D-E tries to connect to either triangle.
This is too far.
much better
Heavy.  Crosscut, attach, try to get forcing moves.  Leave stones behind.  There are lots of ways things can happen.
This is a wasted move, as both white groups that are connected can link to own stones, and black can easily get out.
These moves look like white is desperate, and thinking that he is behind.  It is difficult to connect all of these.  See the variation for a count
This was a good sequence for black.  Now white can no longer kill black with one move:
this is currently unnecessary, as white will have a shortage of liberties
Very good for black!
No, this is not necessary.  Black could instead get some points
now white made black  A killable again :)  But white can be cut...  So no time for this
?  now white is even more cut
Black has no hurry.  White cannot protect against this any more
???  White should study a bit elementary life and death problems.  There is no room for an eye on the side.  A is a false eye, and three empty spaces means white can kill.  This game was in the end not about direction of play.  Instead, white allowed black to cut a big part from a group for free, and failed to kill a big group.  These are tactical mistakes, and more reading practice is needed, such as life&death problems.  This is the last comment.
FM: this looks a bit slow to me
FM: good approach side
FM: very fighting style. In a game I would be afraid to play this way for if white makes a strong group, a splitting move in the lower side may trouble the marked stones, which also happened.
FM: As black responds here, white gets a nice position on the lower side.
FM: Quite territorial play. A is the biggest point here.
Wouldn't A be better? I didn't think of it until I reviewed it.  FM: this move is a bit submissive. I would prefer B or direct starting a fight around C. If black answers here, white got a very nice kikashi as T3 - S2 protected his stones against S6 in sente.
FM: very bad move. R4 will not be sente anymore and S6 will work again.
FM: Should be before T2 if white wanted to play this.
Overplay, should be at A I think.  FM: this move is interesting
FM: painful for white - lost sente
Was this the best move? I felt it was definitely one of the big moves because it eliminated A from being a serious threat and removed aji from both A and B.  FM: this move is territorial and tries to claim an easy win. It does not secure much territory directly and requires a lot of reading before being played: if white manages to invade succesfully, this stone may cause only overconcentration. I don't know if it is really the best, my feeling would put it on O15, but its really hard to say. In a game I would play like in my variation.
FM: Strage shape, but it seems to be effective.
FM: nice move
FM: This is very big. Black should probably play here himself.
Certainly unacceptable.  FM: big point, but C8 was better - makes aji in the black group while playing a bit more on the influence and making the K5 move bigger. Anyway A is the biggest move now.
FM: Good feeling, white does not have really good answer here.
Much too passive.  FM: strange move.
FM: The losing move I think. Forces white to go to the center and become strong.
I played this to be able to play A.  FM: painful decision
Big move. Black shape becomes small and white is strong. Because of the marked stone.
FM: The influence point making the marked stones quite weak now. The game is probably over now.
FM: questionable. You forced white to connect in sente, but if you have tenukied, white would have to connect here in gote anyway.
This I believe was my biggest mistake. A would have been better. Not that is was horrible though, just substandard.  FM: Unfortunately, I dont see where the A is.
Here I got lost by time :( Overall, I thugh I played a reasonable game, but I felt that during the fight, I played more like I was trying to kill his group than gain territory. Can you please show me how you would have attacked? Thanks so much!  FM: you are right. All the game you had the upper hand I think and the move 73 was a good opportunity to get strenght and let white live while ruling the board. Unfortunately, the result of a go game is often decided by one move like this.  If you have any questions feel free to ask me Thanks for attention  Field Mouse
Az: This is probably fine, but having all three stones low feels a little odd to me, maybe o16 instead? (I really don't know...)
Maybe this was a wrong move? should I have played at O4, O3, E16 or something instead?  Az: The classic move with the Kobayashi fuseki (which is that this is on the right side) is to play at 'a', see variation. The goal is to avoid the high pincer, since it pushes you into a running battle where K10 will prove very valuable to white
This was quite a troublesome pincer since I had never experienced it before, so I actually didn't know what to do with it, which is why I used quite some time to think about it. Any suggestions to the continuation from this point? I think the continuation I came up with was rather bad for me in this game.  Az: This is a very normal pincer, so you need to learn some of the basic joseki. 'a' is the most common move, but it is dangerous when white has support on both sides like this (and the influence it builds you won't help). 'b' starts a gigantic fight and is definetly unreasonble. 'c' starts a running fight when you counter attack his stone, but the white group in the LL corner is strong so this is questionable. 'd' aims to take influence, but again looks a little risky, so I would probaly settle with 'e' and make the base before deciding what to do next.
Az: Missed chance for white to link up his stones in sente with 'a', after which it is very hard for black.
Hmm, I feel I gave white too much at this point, even though I have fighting power and influence, but he has the advantage at this point right? and in such case, what could I have done different?  Az: First, exchange 'a' for 'b' in sente. You don't need to add another move, since even if you leave it you've prevented W 'c' later which is way too good for him. The fight is going to get rough, but white gets a for nothing if you don't fight so probably need to play something like this.
Az: B 'a', W 'b', B 'c' W 'd' B 'e' would be one possibility
I didn't see any other way than to try and keep him down there at the moment, any other moves that might have worked?  Az: See prev.
I think this is a bad move? even though I am not sure....  Az: This is too blunt. B wants to have peeped at 'a' first, now white wouldn't answer the way you want. B 'b' is more normal, it builds up strength for your group while keeping white seperated, and makes sure you don't get trapped
andyolol [2k]: ...  Az: This is good for white
I should problably have blocked white with J3 or H3 or something instead?  Az: Yes, you must block at j3, it is the only possible move. White does not yet have eyes, and the left starts to look thin. Under no circumstances can white be allowed to connect here.
Wasted move, I know... I am not sure why I made that, I felt my group was rather insecure at the moment, so I wasted a move on it, even though this didn't really bring me anything. Any thoughts or alternative moves? Do I even need to play additional moves to save the group?
Once again, I felt the group was unstable. Another wasted move?  Az: N5 is worse than passing, since it does active damage. This move is necessary to repair some of the damage from N5.
Auch, that one hurt. I think I reacted to it the right way, or?  Az: The best answer is to avoid getting into a mess like this a couple moves earlier, I would try to resist with 'a' just because black's only real hope is to keep white out of the center
Az: Now the group is really weak and blacks prospects are grim.
Az: Saving everything is going to fail - and if you're going to keep one group this is the wrong one. These black stones have no purpose anymore, they can't be used for fighting when white is completely connected and they don't have any terroritory. See var
Az: The black stones are unconditionally dead, it will be hard to win after this. Best to get a forcing move or two out of them, see var
Was this the right move? or should I have played at B2?  Az: 1) B can't live here, 2) trying to live does more damage than letting the stones quietly die and using the aji later.
Az: Strange decision for white, better to just block at 'a'
Did I get too greedy here? At the time I felt it was a good move, but now when I look at it, it looks quite greedy and with little importance at the moment.  Az: This is more important than the center, white was probably trying to play F10 in sente before coming back here.
Living in gote, it was all I could do I think, I couldn't find any alternatives to live at that moment.  Az: Black is lucky to be alive with both groups, but the damage is very large
Az: Probably best to tenuki, see var
Too passive? Any other moves that I should have played instead? like E16 or instance? or something like that
I think I made a wrong choice here? should have played around D14 I think? or maybe even D16  Az: D14 doesn't make much sense since white is already on the side there. D16 is more interesting, but he has the choice of whether to go up or down, and the influence won't help you much, see var. This seems reasonable since W has thickness.
Would B15 be better at this point?  Az: Yes.
I think I choose a bad joseki, his stones work too well together in that area now.  Az: Agreed, this also lets him starts a fight if he chooses. Better to play simply so close to thickness.
Hmm a mistake?  Az: If you don't know the o-nadare (large avalanche) joseki getting into this pattern at all is a big mistake ;) This is a legitimate move, though I think it would be better to end it quickly and keep the corner.
Az: D18 is the only move
Az: This is courting disaster
That move was obviously a mistake. Should have played at D18 instead.  Az: Yes, but better at D18 directly ;) That way you won't have to nurse yet another weak group of stones and he won't have as many free moves.
Az: Pointless, play at 'a' directly to link up your stones.
Az: Better to save these moves for a rainy day - or better yet, a ko fight. This destroys a lot of aji which you could activate later if your group is threatened.
Az: It's easy to get caught up in the moment, but why is black trying to save these 3 stones? The point value is small and they are sitting next to a rock of white stones. There are much more important moves, like 'a'
At that moment I had messed up completely and lost my group so I desperately tried to save these last few stones. Any ideas for sabaki or something?  Az: Sabaki works better if they care about taking your stones; white doesn't have any pressing reason to take these stones now so they don't have much forcing ability. Just leave them be, you can do something later in yose.
Dead, what a shame.  Az: Game over. Trying to save 3 stones which weren't serving any purpose was the final nail in the coffin. Black is down at least 20 by the most optimistic count and has weak groups everywhere, end of comments.
I am not sure what that move was for, but I think it was a blunder
I felt it was too risky to play tenuki here and let White play N6.
I had wanted to play N14 but I didn't see time for it.
A desperate and obviously futile attempt to live. (last comment)
Well to be honest, I really do not know how to counter this "attack" black 5.  [David] - This isn't so much an attack as an approach.  Whether it becomes an attack depends as much on your response as on your opponent's play.  There are numerous "peacible" ways to settle this position.  If either player chooses a more complicated, difficult route, then it becomes more like at attack.  I've sketched out the typical play in a variation.
This move by B is not typical.  Your presence at the 4,4 point already indicates that you are emphasizing influence over territory.  B here is trying to get into that influence, but in a clumsy way.  The safe option is to play at Q18 and accept the very generous corner.  Probably what I would play given that this isn't a situation I've encountered before.
Is white 8 good?  [David] - It is extremely thick.  Your connection there is perfectly safe, so it's much better to play Q18.  See variations
This is the punishment for not taking care of Q18.
This is highly passive.  See the variation.  It's important to read out options like this before you move so you know where you can play.
This is a strange approach.  There isn't a standard response I'm aware of, but simply extending to C3 in response is stronger than it may seem.  A move that is diagonal to an opponent's stone (lie C4 is) is called a "shoulder hit."  There is a proverb in go that says that you should extend in response to a shoulder hit.  This will be true a lot of the time.  The reason is that it creates contact in a way that is strong for you.  Your white stones gain a liberty in the process of contacting, whereas the black stone loses one.  B will now have to worry about his survival, whereas W starts to make a base in the corner.  See variation.  This move by B could be considered an attack (though a poor one) compared to the previous approach in the top right corner.
Again, I do not really know how to defend against such a stone.  [David] - This is a bad idea for a major reason:  It allows B to split your stones easily, while gaining strength in his own stones.  There is another go proverb that states "Even a fool connects against a peep."  What that means is that, whenever an opponent plays a stone that threatens to separate you, you should connect.  With this move, you are inviting your opponent to separate you, essentially creating the peep yourself.
B gives you a reprieve, but does take that nice 3,3 point.
Phew.
Good, ignore the small stuff.
.. and I obviously did not defend good, I think.  [David] - This is a good result given that you played the D5 stone.  However, a better first play here would have benefitted you more.
This stone is very very small.  You are safe, and this isn't really getting you any territory, whereas B is gaining on the bottom right.  You need to stop that.
good move?  [David] - It's odd.  Here you really want to play in the bottom right as I see it.  B has influence there that you would like to break up.  Also, this move invites B into your nice influence on the left side if he plays over the top if your stones.  I would have preferred something like F17 in this area, but  as I said, bottom right is more important.
This is good for you.  It's a standard move for B, but in this instance the fact that you have so much influence on the left side makes it bad.  He is giving you the left.
SO SMALL!  That is worth next to nothing!  D15 is screaming out for a play!  This move adds nothing to your safety, does not threaten B's safety, and adds a single point to your score.  D15 is much much bigger.  Or F17 or G17 maybe.  In order to avoid this small stuff you have to break the habit of following what seems to be the flow of play.  B made a move in that direction, so you follow.  However, this gives B control over your moves and it means you aren't really thinking about what's best.  On every single move you have to pause for a minute and make sure you aren't blindly following the flow.  This is much easier to do when playing in person compared to online, as you actually have to physically pick up a stone.  For that reason, I always take my hand off the mouse after I play a stone online.  That way I have to make some significant physical action, and I'm reminded to make sure I'm using my head.
The fact that B responds is a major reprieve to you.  He could have shifted focus and made real gains.
Phew!!!  See the variation for the disaster.
This is quite passive.  As a new player, it's often hard to see how to attack, so you simply extend instead.  This allows your opponent to take initiative and control the game.  The B stone in the lower right still has not been contested.  B has two unfinished shapes at the top.  These are higher prioroty than a simple extension.  I give some examples of where I might play here.
A strange move by B.. he seems to be defending the center, which is not his to defend.  Much better would be to play in the uncontested corner.
This isn't necessary.  Your stones on top are perfectly safe.  The stone below has many options.  If B tried to separate them, you just expand toward the bottom.  This is very small.
And this is even smaller!
If you are safe, look around a bit before you play.  Here you are following again.
I guess white 64 is unneccesary.  [David] - Yes indeed.  Read out the moves in your head before playing.  As I wrote that I noticed that this was a 10 min SD game.  I don't think I'd recommend playing that speed right now if you want to improve your game.  It means you can't really think about the moves as they happen.. only afterward once it's too late to improve them.  I would play some slow games and practice reading out the consequences of the moves.  Reading is a learned skill that can be very frustrating and difficult, but there isn't any substitute.  If you are able to read better than your opponent, it is an enormous advantage.  One you learn to read 4-5 moves ahead, reading 1-2 moves (like this situation) is almost second nature.
Also white 66 was not needed, if I'm not wrong.  [David] - Something new players will do is make an attempt at reading, then decide on the result, but still be unsure.  This is what you are indicating to me here.  I won't say whether you are right or wrong, because once you read it properly, you will *know.*  You won't need my confirmation.
Ah, now B takes over on the bottom and the chance is lost.
This stone is a little abstract.  What is its purpose?  Where does it run when it gets cut off?  I would focus more on territory and less on stones.  Where can you play here to get territory?  Blur your vision a little and look for bigger plays.
Regarding the last sequence.. what a disaster for W!  W gained a few points on the left, maybe 10.  In return, B is now utterly uncontestable on the bottom and has enormous influence on the top.  Allowing yourself to be enclosed like this leads to major gains for your opponent.  This stems from focusing on capturing stones and fighting and not on territory.  Take a step back and see where B has potential for territory, then try to reduce it (not eliminate it, that's impossible).  This has simply added to B's potential.
At this point I started to think that I had no chance against my opponent, as he got the bottom right corner (very big territory), and he got the upper part of the board. (which i would invade later)  [David] - This is also how I see it.  There were still options at move 66, but the next sequence shut it down for you.
This is defensive when you are behind.  If you are losing, you need to start fighting!
This silly sequence was a fight over 2 stones.  There are bigger fish to fry!  Let him have the 2 stones while you make real gain!
I do not really understand 101-117. Where is my mistake so that he could get his stones "on top" of my group?  [David] - It was more than any one move, there were several that led up to it, mostly a result of worrying about losing a couple stones when there were more important things to worry about.  I put in a variation to give an idea how to respond, but the best move of all is somewhere else on the board.
The first time in my life that I tried this kind of invasion. (well, this is maybe my 10th go-game on a 19x19 board) Is white 118 good? Or are there any better options? I chose this because I have space to both sides here.  [David] - This is probably doomed to failure, but only because it came so late.  In general, you don't want to invade, you want to reduce (unless your opponent is just asking for it).  When you wait until this point, though, invading is your last option.  A reduction here would be more like G14, where B has a tough choice between allowing you to reduce and attacking the reducing stone.  With this invasion, B's course of action is clear: attack!
B is very confident about the top.
Forget this!  Now is your chance to actually make your invasion work!  Dont be a follower, lead your game.  E8 for B is a big threat, but at this point you are behind, so you need to think aggresively.
Your stones have 2 eyes now, so there is no need to defend.  Attack!  In a game where you were winning, this type of play would be okay.
That was actually a nice sequence, but the gain won't win you the game.
Too big step with white 144?  [David] - No, this is fine.  I wouldn't expect survival here, but that is among your best options.
Whoa, B really gives you a chance!  Now you may be able to make it.
Lucky you!  B doesn't defend well and you get life.  Now use it to take more territory away from B!
So conservative!  You have life!  Run with it!  This brings up a side point.  You may not have known you had life here.  It's very impportant to know what shapes are alive, and when you have 2 eyes.  Practice figuring out what shapes are alive and it will help you.
Group is alive, I was relieved.  [David] - It was already very much alive.  I am certainly the opposite of relieved.. you could have done so much more damage with it!!
Aughgh, chance lost!
I think this is a good move. (white 174)  [David] - Yes, it's probably the biggest left.
You can safely play elsewhere here, no need to respond.  Keeping sente is very important in the endgame, so read out each play.  The nice thing is that it's much easier to read at the end of the game.
This won't get B anywhere.
Was white 198 necessary?  [David] - Read it yourself and make absolutely sure.  So sure you don't need to ask me.
Second try for an invasion. Would a better player than me get a living group or was it generally hard to get some territory here?  [David] - This would generally be considered a rude move unless you're sure you can get something out of it.  This type of "prospecting" in your opponent's territory tends to prolong the game.  If you actually read out a weakness, that's fine.  However, at this point, there is still a big move to be had in A18.  Taking the corner is significant at the end of the game.
Gah, he got it.  That's worth much more than the failed invasion.
He got this too, more lost to the failed invasion.
White 258 necessary? I think not.  [David] - Same answer ^_^
More lost to the failed invasion!  Don't try that sort of thing (well, at all, but if you have to) until after the entire board it settled.
My comment in the game: "just trying something"  I was unsure if it worked out or not, but I believed that I would lose the game anyway. (and I was wrong)
Here B loses the group because he refuses to lose a few stones.  See variation.
PNH: This is feasible, but the usual joseki continuation has black continuing at the marked point.  Extending in front the the shimari, as you did, is good but it is a bit far.  It makes it easy for white to invade. See variations.
This might be the wrong direction. See variations.
The marked group is insecure now, because of the possibility of white s17. Black should s17 now instead of c6. Moves that make groups secure have precedence over big moves in the opening.  Considered in the local context, however, your c6 is perfect.
This is not efficient. The marked group is perfectly safe. Now the four stones are overconcentrated considering the wide spaces still available on the board.  This move would be good if there were a competition between the black framework (moyo) on the left side and the white one on the lower side. However the white framework is not completed yet. Better destroy it than reduce it. E6 just induce white into playing where he would like to play anyway -- in the vicinity of k4.
White has got a wide double wing formation around the 4-4 stone. Now would be time to invade the 3-3 point in order to probe the direction will build his wall. See both variations.  If I were white, here, I might respond with q3, r4 or r3 to close off the corner. But first I might play s17 in order to attack the upper right black group.
Avoid empty triangles.
Just ensure that your group lives (whith s17) and then go after the big points.
This is a bit slow. H14 is better. See variation.
This appears to protect an inexistent cutting point. The marked stones can't be cut. If there were a white stone at h16, then this might make sense. J12 would feel good now, instead.
This is submissive. The two white stones aren't connected. The two point jump is a somewhat secure connection only along the edge, on the third or fourth line. You can easily hack through this here.
By about here most of the right side looks white's in my opininion (which doesen't mean much but anway).  PNH: Let me show you another pattern, then. (see var.)
It would be an opportune time to invade at R3 now.
This probably isn't very well played.  PNH. This move is good.
This move might be worth 1 point. I've marked some of the moves that are much bigger.
Trying to snake my way to my other group.
This is not a meaningful cut for white to do. Both segments are connected to life.
Going for a bamboo joint with the L-shaped group  PNH: It is already connected to E6. See variations.  And then, S8 makes an eye if needs be. If white S8, then you indeed would have to connect at q10 and o15 before white can atari you.
Here I decided to take a bit of a break from constant attacking and strengthened my territory a bit since I can be a bit weak against invasions.  PNH: I understand. It is a safe precaution, especially if you are unsure how to kill an invader here, although inviting such an unreasonable invasion would be na opportunity to refine your skills at killing.  Consider, however, that the score is very close. Look at the two variations.
Trying to go for these four stones. I feel a bit guilty counting on my opponent to make a mistake here but well it all turned out well later.
This was a very risky move, again counting on my opponent to make a mistake.  PNH. It is not risky, actually. White is doomed. See variation.
Here white must connect at L8, of course. However, you should have played atari at O7. See variation.
I'm not sure what white is hoping for, here ;-)
Here i decided to try a bit of ko fighting which I have never done before.  PNH: Very good. You should never shy away from a ko. Choosing not to fight is just giving away points. You might choose not to set up a ko that is too risky, however. But after it is set up, you cannot get a worse result through fighting than you would get through giving up. (Unless, of course, you worsen your own position through making an ill-conceived threat.)
DC: Hi, my name is Dylan I am about 1k-3d varies a lot. In this openning it would be fine to make the two space extension in my opinion. the three space is usually used against a star point stone as per variation.
DC: White needs to protect Q7, black is alive and achieves nothing with a further push at s11. cutting directly at q7 would punish white.
DC: white is lucky.
DC: Pincering would be more active and since white does not connect at B3 black has options.
DC: a terrible move, please explain it's purpose as it just seems to give black amazing shape. better is c2.
DC: Unecessary
Odif: I pincered here, to try and make my b3 capture do some work, hoping to generate an attack on c5 group, would a c10 pincer, be better maybe
DC: Why connect here? the G3 stones are too strong to waste by connecting. One must think to oneslef what is the move with the finest followup. there has to be more to a position than simply an arrangement of stones and there often is.
DC: A big point well spotted.
DC: 3/3 invasion after the extension on both sides is normal here. If black gets Q17 the efficency is high.
Odif: What should i do here, If my san san invasion is a success then i think i will have an easy win, Is this analysis correct.?? Iwasnt worried about my E12 group should i have sealed in the top left group, or even played somewhere in the bottom right instead
Odif:death in gote, I realise this should be elsewhere DC: the problem here lies with J17 in this game. The logic goes F17 is strong yes? yes. A too space extension is generally strong? yes. An extension from strength has been made which is principally inefficent.
DC: Nice idea with the leaning attack. i would try l16 directly to distract whilst one builds strength to attack. The only problem being black can ignore a great deal around here now.
Odif:lucky
N: This is not very big, see the variation on the joseki move
N: I don't think this was the right choice here, better to just play the "normal" way and take sente. This move can be good for W if he already has a strong position in the upper left corner, but that is not the case here.
N: To play tenuki here may be a bit dangerous, the group at the bottom gets pretty weak
N: I don't like this. It does close the corner more or less, but it also makes W stronger, making it harder to use the aji of the marked stone, which can always start causing trouble
Pate [6k]: hmm i think we just followed through four different josekis there.. fthvrl [5k]: very interesitng yeap :)
N: Here the order should be different, B should attack first and then W has to defend, not W defend and then B defend also :)
N: W is playing with fire...
N: This sequence is a bit too nice on W, I think. You do build up thickness towards the center, but that is not worth a lot here since W has influence in the center too.
N: now the aji of the R7 stone is pretty much gone. Also I would think about not answering this.
N: There is a proverb "don't peep where you can cut", which I think applies here. The W wall is not very strong yet. You are just asking W to make the wall stronger, but get not much useful in return.  Your move doesn't seem very well thought through :)  Let's estimate the score at this point (always a good idea):  Black:  upper left: 12 points upper right: 20 points lower right: 20 points lower left: 6 points total: 58 points  White:  left side: 8 points bottom: 5 points max. right side: maybe 25 points komi: 7.5 total: 43.5 points  So as far as solid territorry is concerned, B is ahead by about 15 points.  So all you really need to do is make sure W does not get more than 15 points more than B!  by the way the bottom was counted quite generously for W, B can attack there and enlarge his territorry while making W smaller, if not just kill him.  So overall I think your strategy of creating a weak group in the middle of W strong area is exactly what you should not do. Just quietly reduce W so he does not get too many points there while scoring some points in the middle yourself would be the best thing to do. (after attacking the bottom maybe)
N: This does not work, W too strong.
N: Now you are under pressure to make those stones live. W made perfect use of his wall.
fthvrl [5k]: are you there* or thinking?  N: obviously a mistake... what do you do if W defends the H11 group?
Pate [6k]: thinking, sorry ^^
N: Good reading here
N: small, not necessary...
N: bad, you end up in gote
N: There is a lot of aji left in upper right corner, very dangerous, I think.  No more comments about the endgame, nothing much more spectacular going on there.  You played a solid opening, but you gave away the control of the game in the center after B 69. Another missed opportunity was to attack the bottom white group more strongly, which I'm fairly certain could have been killed.
DT - Good. There are several ways to play as White in 6 stones handicap games. See possible variations.
DT - White does't need to complete the joseki. It is better to play move 5 elsewhere, leaving the situation on the top as it is.
DT - This joseki ends is gote for White. Now Black has sente and will take a big point.
DT - Strange. O15 is not urgent or needed at this point. Black should take a big point instead, around K4.
DT - You're now playing high. Pherhaps the 3rd line would be better. This high approach to the corner is only used under special conditions (after the joseki, White O4, Black Q6, White Q3, Black R3, White P3, Black R2, you can see that Black's territory on the corner is really big, and Black has a monkey jump at O1 that can be used later), so my advice to you is *do not* use this joseki, unless the game you're playing is a competition of moyos ^__^
DT - You did not need to play this move. You have to be more active. After this, if Black playes something like Q8, his right side will be huge.
DT - This is bad. If you want to extend, C8 instead of C9 is the only move.
DT - It's painful, having to go back and connect with B11. White would like to prevent Black enclosing the corner with D17, for example.
i wanted to denie him the territory he could get with his wall  DT - Note also that Black has *almost* all four corners. Its urgent to play something like D17 to avoid Black getting a huge corner. If you can do that and at the same time gain influence towards the center, it would be great. See variation.
DT - This is a dangerous plan. I think you missed the net. See variation.
he didnt know about ladder breakers ^^  DT - And you don't know nets =p
DT - Now the ladder works, but P12 was damaging. Black's right side is huge. The P12 - Q12 exchange was good for Black. There is no need to play ladder when you have a net.
DT - I would capture immediately.
DT - This is slow. White should invade at san san (top left), and look for sente. See variation.
i think i messed up this invastion later, but it still looks like a good idea to me  DT - Yes, of course it's a good idea to invade. This is a big point.
DT - I don't know this variation, but seems OK to me.
DT - Is this a joseki? C18 seems wrong, first you should play D15. See variations.
DT - Now White wants a stone at D15. That is why it was so important to play D15 before C18.
DT - This is of course wrong. Black should punish White's mistake.
DT - White was really lucky here.
DT - With B3 played, you can take the corner now. See variation.
DT - Nice point.
DT - There is some aji in White's position. Black can play K3 later.
DT -  O__o?
DT - Black is playing slow. There are now some big moves on board for White, such as C2, N2, R18, etc.
a big blunder.. didnt see it.. maybe lost my chances here  DT - Yes, this was a big mistake.
hoped for a mistake here ^^  DT - With the 1 Day per Move rule, your hopes are destroyed ^__^
DT - Good for White.
the 2nd big blunder.. i surrendered  DT - This is too big. I can't even watch!
yufred [2k]: hi
Is this ok? any suggestion  [EV] An aggressive approach at M17 is most common, threatening a serious invasion at H16 or H17.  However, I think this move is also good.
[EV] W could consider omitting this reinforcement, given the mild B approach move.
not sure about this approach. How about d3 or c3 to take corner?  [EV] All three moves are good, but of course lead to very different games.
[EV] This is the first move I do not like, though I would not call it a serious error.  It seems you are defending a fairly strong corner instead of the weaker side.  I would prefer to reinforce the weak group while blocking W from making a base with a move at R10.  See variations.
[EV] The proverb says to extend after a crosscut, not atari, and in this case it is correct.  See variations and next comment.
I think this move is bad. The idea is to live in sente. I think I need to play top-right corner.  [EV] This move is good, but omit the preceding exchange, which is aji-keshi.  W will then be much more constrained, forced to play in a way which defends against both S10 and R11.  W will not even be able to capture the Q10 cutting stone if B decides to run.  By fixing the shape with an unnecessary atari, B removes much of W defensive burden.
not sure about this move.  Should I invade in top white group?  [EV] This move is fine.  It is much better to prepare an invasion properly, even if your opponent defends first, than to invade without sufficient strength to back it up.  W is strong enough above that there is no severe invasion, and if W gets a move here, the center starts looking big.
[EV] Good invasion -- nice timing and nice placement.  I would first consider the move one space lower, but it does not work out so well (see variation).
[EV] However this continuation seems a little too direct, as the W hane in response is painful.  I would spend some time looking for a lighter response.  Some possibilities are shown.
[EV] Atari at F8 before it is too late, to make the most of this sacrifice.
[EV] This result is good for W -- the B invasion was not a success.
[EV] Moderately large, but not worth losing sente.  Continuing at M3 is much more important.
[EV] I think this move is too small.  W is already immensely thick here, and making center territory will be difficult with the B stone at E13 sticking out.
[EV] Good, back on track here, after a few pauses:)
how about this move? should I ignore?  [EV] You should take the sente atari at Q8 first, since it helps limit the potential W center territory, and the Q10 stone no longer has much aji to preserve.  Other large yose moves are marked.  I think all of these moves are larger than N5 or M4.
is this necessary?  [EV] Yes, it looks like W is now threatening to kill.  The hanging connection at T9 would live with a little more territory.
How to approach the centre now?  [EV] The center is not so big.  I would first consider a move at the bottom, safely expanding B territory a little while reducing W center a little.  W does not have a single move which can enclose a large center territory, since B has reducing moves from many directions.
[EV] W got 15 center points by capturing a few stones and can get more later by exploiting the weakness at K12.  B could have reduced the W center this much by safely picking away at the outside.
[EV] Is this really needed to live?  [EV] Not much happened after this, so comments end here.
yufred [2k]: ok
miki8mizu: Hi! teddy99: hi
CL: Attaching seems slightly wrong.  When you attach you will get a better result on the left at the expense of a worse result on the top.  I think you would be better playing slightly further away here (E14 or D13)
CL: I would B16 here in order to get sente.
Is this good for black? -- CL It is fine, though I prefer white slighly.  White can even F13 in sente before K17
I would play R3 here instead, O5 does not seem so interesting
How about this joseki -- CL: As I mentioned when you played O5, I would not have chosen it, but I don't think it is a big problem
CL: H4 not really needed, also it loses the aji of say G5.  Given you go straight to E5 next, I think you should G5 now.
CL: You see how G5 would have been better than H4?
CL: locally I prefer G12, globally, fixing L4 is key
CL: Painful.  This was the first time you took a big move over an urgent one
CL: another dubious move
CL: I would probably Q3 instead
I think this move is not good -- CL: This is always going to be painful.  I would N5 instead I think but even that will come under severe attack
CL: I would Q7 instead
CL: Strange sequence, but seemed to work out okay in the end
now black is in trouble -- CL: Sure, but you chose that with F13
CL: this ko will be very hard for black
CL: Ko threat seems smaller than capturing the ko
CL: O7 better
CL: White plays slack but black still loses out here, the ko threat was not big enough
CL: Heavy, R10 instead
do you think black still in the game? -- CL: White is far ahead, it will be very hard for black to catch up
CL: White is aiming for the knock-out blow to finish the game
CL: Seems a mistake
CL: Cut is also okay
CL: Too small, black is far behind and needs to take a bigger risk
is this black bad move? -- CL: Seems okay
CL: This does not really work, how about K13 instead?
CL: Overplay
CL: Interesting move.   It looks like black is in trouble here, but thinking about it more, I think this move is a mistake.  White is ahead, so all white needs to do to win is live comfortably in the corner.  Something like F18 instead, or even C18 seems plenty.  This move gives black a chance to win, and a chance to lose by even more - so not  a good strategy by white
is this correct? -- CL: Hard to say but I don't think so
wrong move by black -- CL: Seems so
CL: Last mistake
teddy99 has resigned the game.
Good thought, but I'd prob go a little closer to the upper right group.  WIth K17, W gets to build upper right group while putting pressure on new B stone.
At first I thought this was slow but now I like it =/
I was trying to keep some pressure on the upper black group while also preparing to approach on the bottom  ------------------  Not sure this move is so effective. Upper B/W group seems pretty strong to me. Approaching bottom sounds better.
i wasn't sure the best place to start on the bottom, but this seemed as good as any  ---  Yep
Weak response even with C10. I'd go w/ something normal like D6 or something fun like H3.
i was planning to play k4 if black q6. if black played in the middle, like k3, then I would try to get some thickness on the right side and try to surround the lower middle area. that's how things played out, but i'm not sure it was a good decision.  -----  Yea this is "ok" - actually in a lot of handicap games, W will play this in an effort to play 'fast'. So if a high dan plays it in their handicap games, it should be fine.  I think this leads to complications though so in an even game I'll usually take the safer route w/ something like k4.
I prefer W M5 - B would be hard pressed to split W's groups since it needs to defend the O4 group.
the next few moves from here played out as I expected. i had hoped that would make me strong enough to start poking around again at some of black's weaker groups elsewhere on the board, but it didn't work.  ---  Yea it's a decent sequence.
i had no idea where to go now. There aren't really any big territorial points now and i'm a little behind, so I was trying to prevent black from growing.  ---  Yea, looks like W is slightly behind, and there are no spots that jump out, since pretty much every group is stable. Only B's R13 group could be considered weakish.  I think a lot of moves could be fine here, including the one you played. I'd also consider something like R9 or P8.
didn't expect this
Can't salvage this stone (as W finds out) so F11 better.
Feels like W is trying to create something here... I don't see it and probably better to leave aji for later.
this is what i had in mind when playing e10, but again, it didn't work. (noticing a trend...)
i wanted to build some center-oriented strength with which to pressure the upper black group
I would do H18 if I wanted to support the upper B group.
Good sequence by W.
W's goals here (if cannot kill) is to surround in sente. Prefer something like K13. Make B spend a move for central eye, then another to secure upper eye.  This move kind of allows B some maneouvering.
try to prevent a cut in sente
no clue what i was trying to do here...
i missread this whole sequence and thought earlier in the game i would be ok if b tried to cut.
Good thought by W but probably a little too late... B is connected and has a pretty safe victory now.
Thanks again for your help!
H: This allows black to form two shimari, which is considered better for black.  W should approach at A or prevent this opening entirely (see earlier variations)
H: As black, I would already feel happy
H: I'd respond to this shoulderhit
Emphasizing territory but I've been told D14 is a better move to lessen w capacity to extend towards bottom  H: Yilun Yang recommends this sort of splitting move on the third line so that when W approaches the stone it is more stable.
H: A bit odd for W, I'd generally prefer to approach low, to undermine the stone's stability.
Breaking line to prepare for r16
H: This is not usually a very good idea.  It encourages q14, which is a good shape for B (remember the proverb, "extend three spaces from a wall of two stones")
H: This was not such a good idea.  Before, B could invade at A.  This helps to secure W's corner which gives W more than B.
H: During this sequence you worried about a some captures worth only a few points, taking gote too often.  See the variations for some other ideas.
H: White played well here, and it looks like W is ahead now.
H: This is too close to a strong white position.  You had to hold back some.  d13 already has made your position weak.
H: When stone touches stone, 9 times out of 10 you want to extend.  Like this leaves the weak spot at A.
H: This was a good answer.  o3 needed to be an invasion, not an approach.
H: This was a strange move.  I prefer not touching my opponents stones when I can help it, especially since this only makes your position weak.
Might have been too small  H: Indeed.  There are some other, bigger moves to be made right now at A,B,C,D for example.
Felt compelled to defend. bM16 do no good if wM13 can't be captured anyway  H: Let's count territory both ways.
Feel the need to prepare a base for connecting M2 group in case it's overrun.  H: The cut is still better.
Maybe this was no danger if E16
H: this was unnecessary.  See variation.
H: also unnecessary.  See variation.
H: This was a very big move.  See variation.
MR: More normal would be a kakari at D15 or a Chinese like opening for black.
MR: I would prefer a kakari against the lower right corner.
MR: This extension is quite far, although I can very well understand that white does not want to extend to R12 only. Consequently, black should invade directly, e.g. R12.
MR: The development in the upper right is far too good for white.
MR: ? Black should switch to the upper left with D15. The area around Q14 is not interesting for both sides.
Was that alright so far, or did we make mistakes?  M: To end in gote here is again very bad for black.
MR: good!
I thought this move came too close to my shimari, so I wanted to exploit that somehow ...  MR: I think that black's extension is alright. Playing J17 only would leave the extension G17 to white later. Invading the black extension on the top only helps black to give at least some sense to his stones around P14.
MR: This move tends to strengthen the opponent.
MR: Feels too heavy for me. Why not L16? White's goal should be just to get "something".
MR: ?
... but now I'm not sure if this really was a suitable method. What do you think?  MR: Black made it rather easy for you ...
In situations like these I never know from which direction to approach. 2-Point from the upper left doesnt seem so big, and something like C8 doesn't really guard the corner ...  MR: Yes. The black move prevents white from playing in the same area (white D10 would also fit very well in the white position). So white should not answer directly but take sente to play in another area, e.g. H3.
... so I decided to leave it as miai and undermine his moyo. Correct?
I thought this was the logical point, but maybe it was not really necessary ... at least it will lead the game into complications.  MR: After taking profit with G4 etc., I think that it is not necessary to take away *every* area from black. Maybe it would be enough to later reduce with P5. But Q2 as a probe is alright as well, I think.
MR: This sequence is just to whites liking.
Okay, and now wild center fighting begins. Please tell me where we messed it up!
MR: Maybe R10 is better in order not to give black too much forcing moves to set up a splitting attack (white has weak groups at the top and at the bottom).
MR: ... especially as you played R10 now anyway ...
MR: Strange shape.
MR: My first idea was N7, but if black forces with o6 and N6 directly, the fight is unclear as well.
MR: Tends to be aji keshi, as one might later prefer to give the atari at M9.
MR: Locally dead.
Ouch! This one I saw myself, but too late. F9 would have finished the matter, right?  MR: Why not E8. Many moves would have "finished the matter", as the black stones around K6 are dead also without white K5 (in fact *onle* without K5).
MR: Better save the stones around K9, as then the black group around M10 remains dead and the white group at the top remains alive.
Here defending would be the logical move, but I felt I had paid enough, so I looked for a way to play more actively. What do you think?  MR: I think that the white stones around L12 are unimportant *unless* you want to kill the black group in the upper right corner. From territory point of view, you do not need to kill the black group in the upper right corner, so I would simply live with M15.
Lucky me. I had a bad feeling about it.  MR: As it stands now, the black group in the upper right corner is alive, so why did you play ko for the life of the white group?
And now the last conflict, turning out into a large ko. My only luck was that my opponent didn't handle the ko fights not so well, but how is this situation to judge properly?  MR: Maybe it is better to give way with G2.
Here his time ran out. Am I alive?
mineteaser: hello danieleff: Hi!
Another possibility would be K3 or K4.
This move is not necessarily the biggest on the board.  It's not a bad move, but there are better moves at this point.  Please see the variations for alternate plays.
See how one of white's first moves is to take that central point in his group?
Should I have pincered the white stone at M17 instead?  Yes, a pincer would have worked better with your other stones I think.  Please see the variation.
The typical play is marked.  See possible variations.
I thought I had gotten him with that move, but I was wrong.  Yes, you still needed a play at R19.
Is that a good response to white's stone?  The better response is to support your stone at C11 with a pincer.
Uneseccary move.  Better to play at D14 here.
Reading mistake here.  As you know, this turned into a ladder.  Typically when there is a formation like this a ladder will be formed if you cut the triangled stones.  Watch for this in your other games.  If you take the time, you will see where it is a bad idea to cut.
This I feel was a good and necessary play.
gote for w.
This is probably a little too slow.  Usually a 2 space jump is safe in these situations.
Save plays like this incase a ko fight appears later in the game like it does in this one.
I played here to prevent stones R5 and S5 from being in atari and losing the potential eye at Q5.  At this point it actually doesn't really matter.  The only time you really want to prevent an eye is when you are trying to kill a group that is trying to live in your territory.    There is not really any way for you to kill this group so the move is better played elsewhere.  This could also be saved for ko threats later.
This group is alive, no point trying to kill it.
The move is here.
The cut became useless.
Best to let the stones die and save your territory.
Should I have extended the atari stone instead?  It's hard to say at this point.  By extending rather than playing the hane, you put your lower group in a risky position, and it's still very unlikely that you will actually kill this group of stones.
C10 first
Here.
There is no need to play G15.
No need for C5, it is gote.
For w this would have been better.
I was very happy with this move because I had read about ko fights before, but I never really had an actual ko fight.
I didn't relize the 3 stones at C5 were in atari until this move.  Yes, thankfully your opponent didn't notice either.
One space jump is safer.
At this point, i thought that white group was alive, but I found out if i played carefully, I could capture the whole group.  This is alive.  White simply made a mistake.  This will not be successful in other games.
W got too greedy.  Here is the move.
With that move, I noticed he could get two eyes easily, and I thought it was lost. However, he accidently made a wrong move which probably did him in.
danieleff: oops  Which obviously did him in.
mineteaser: sorry danieleff: :)
mineteaser: everyone makes mistakes
I noticed with this move that he could easily kill my group with careful moves, so I decided to take the white group on top to prevent this.  There is no need to capture the w group.  It can easily be prevented with one move.
P: Please note that it is more standard for white (joseki) to play at A
P: This move is too soon, extending at A is better for black for 2 reasons: 1) it creates a stable group and gives black a base as well as 2) helps to make future territory.  Basic idea: extend by 3 spaces with a 2 stone wall.
P: a black move at A or B  is preferable.  First, you take away white's chance to make a base for his stones. White A stabilises his group and threatens to take away black territory in the corner.  Second, by taking away white's base with black A you force white to escape in the midlle. You can then keep attacking white (see variation) while making a moyo.  Basic idea: attack the opponent by stealing his base.
P: white is escaping in your potential area of territory, try to avoid this unless you are thick and very strong (not the case here).
P: this is why black at A was suggested earlier.  Black B is probably better as you can limit the influence on the white group in the lower left by trying to seal it in.
P: interesting splitting attack
P: this is good, you make territory on the upper left while threatening the white stones.  Basic idea: attacking while making territory.
P: nice splitting move by black, absolutely necessary.
P: Unfortunately for black white can escape while splitting your groups. Killing this group is not easy.
P: good shape move.
P: Black A is a good endgame move in this area, you close off your corner territory while theatening the life of the white stones.  More territory for black than black at B.  See variation.
P: good endgame move. Probably should have been earlier.
P: black A is more urgent, same idea close territory while threatening white stones.
P: this move did not seem necessary, see variation.  END OF COMMENTS.
Is a move on the left better? I couldn't see a good move.  [EV] The joseki continues with a W extension at A on the left.  W could also consider pushing up at L16 before B gets to play in that area.  Tenuki is probably not good, because ...
[EV] This nice move threatens to undercut W base on the side.
This was a very awkward move. What should I do?  [EV] See variations for a few ideas.
[EV] This move is terrible shape (empty triangle).  I think W should hane here and fight harder.  See variations for some ideas.  I really do not know what is best, but this cannot be it :)
[EV] This move seems a little slack.  B has made a lot of territory in the corner, so W must get compensation by attacking the weak B group.  I would start with the vital point at A to see how B responds.
[EV] Good, not too late.
[EV] Overplay, as the response shows.
I misread here  [EV] Oops.  W had at least a ko to kill B, but instead B lives with a large capture, so this should be a game-losing move.  No need really to look further for the reason for the loss.
Here I knew that M14 worked to connect my group but i thought it was too slow.  [EV] I think it is your best play.  Of course all moves lose from here if B plays well, but by capturing W secures all his weak stones at once and can play strongly afterwards.
[EV] B should connect solidly, to eliminate the M14 capture.
M14 still works but I thought it was still no good
[EV] W has gained a bit up to here.  Now is the time to play M14 to capture the two stones.  Then let B worry about his thin shape on the outside.  W will even be strong enough to try a severe invasion of the corner at A.  If B defends the corner first, W is still behind, but has chances because of his superior thickness across most of the board.
[EV] Another empty triangle.  This should alert you that something is probably wrong.  W loses a lot floundering around here, making the B outside thick instead of thin.  Much better to simply play M14 and live.  No further comments.
M14 still works but then black secures the centre
White can live but feels a long way behind so I thought I would try something in the corner, which fails completely. Basically the game is over now and I have no idea how it got so out of hand. any advice you can give is much appreciated! Thanks!
W resigns
J: This should be saved, since it ends in gote. F15 is a vital point for seperating the black stones and getting to the center. In this case, B responds incorrectly. See variation after b B15, w B17.
J: This connection by black was not needed. See variation.
I felt ok about this result. I didn't really know how any other way to handle C10  J: This result is great for white. B's stones are overconcentrated, and his stones are not working well together.
Seems there is no obvious (to me) direction & way to attack this stone  something like b H3 O3 P3 O4 Q5 (leaving F3 weakness) or H3 O3 Q6 Q2 R3 M4 (also leaving F3 weakness) is what i would expect (also possible from M3 of course) Neither one seemed too tempting atm  J: I added your variation for referrence, as well as another variation to consider starting with G3.
Again this wide pincher maybe i should have gone again for O17 here?  J: O17 would have a tough time with the K16 stone in place. This is fine.
J: This move leaves you with a cramped group. See possible variation starting with R17.
J: R12 was the first move I considered here to settle the group. If black gets here first, w would be uncomforable. If you want to play in this area, I would consider holding back a line at N3. That way you do not leave a weakness at O3 for later.
J: You don't want to respond here. The black stones above are not threatened by this. It does prevent an R3 invasion, but O3 remains for later making it hard to get points here.  You'd rather attack K3, but again, the O3 weakness prevents you from attacking it too strongly. The problem is M3's location is too far away from the corner and would be better at N3.
Any other moves possible here?  J: This is fine. Your group is now stable.
J: This move seems problematic, since b has strong groups on each side and it fails to get points. I would consider Q3 here, which solidifies the corner and leaves it up to black to deal with the M3 stone.
J: This move needs to be at P3 to settle the corner.
J: With the lower right corner floating, it is best to look for a way to connect while attacking. Starting to press with Q10 would help out the group and could look at making a center moyo. This move does not secure many points for you.
J: You are settling your upper right group here, but you are strengthening the black group as well.  With your lower right stones floating, things can get tough.
J: This is timid. Better to play towards the center with O10.
J: This only helps black. See variation.
a big cut around N14 still though. but didn't see any better ways than the M17 invasion  J: There is nothing to fear from the cut, since your group at P14 is solid. See variation.
J: This is where you should be attacking K16. This move seems to help out black more than anything.
J: You missed your oppertunity to play here first.
J: Playing K17 was your last chance to attack black here.
J: At this point the game looks over. All of blacks groups are settled, and the lower right still needs to find its eyes.  Black has a solid lead, in large part due to the play in the lower right.
i missed this move. Any other comments about my endgame up to here?  J: You gained quite a bit in the center. B's biggest gain came from R3.
I felt i was behind so wanted to respond as little as possible
i know i can't fight this ko. game is pritty much over here but the last moves are just desperation. i felt like i was still behind  J: You caught up some with your points in the center. You are still behind. However, this is a ko you can't win.
too early?  Obviously. Never go near your opponent's thickness.
wrong. Don't attach again a weak stone.
Greedy.
Slow.
comment?  since the marked stones are in danger, this move maybe a bit too greedy.
K10 better?  Yes
well, B's slightly leading in territory, so white should do something.
where?
not good for W, Black is quite strong here
no need to connect
kinda passive
should pull out ?
this is safe, since w has M13 and M14 combo
painful
too small.  A or B is bigger
poor move, losing sente, right?  Yes. and white doesn't need to answer.
unexpected - how to deal with it?  This is painful for B.
?
A and B much bigger.
game is close.
usually, this move is not necessary.
painful. All because of A9.  This is the last comment.
FR: thinking about white 12 i also considered moves A-E. A punishes black for not playing C3, and, may be, can help to attack D4, but looks a bit slow. B looks big and threatens h3 next, but doubtful without q5/r5 shimary. C help to protect q3 corner, but r11 still too big for black. D looks slow and passive. E now seems best for me, giving some future to d16 hoshi. What do you think about these moves? Which of them lie in the right direction of development? Or is there something better?
FR: is simply extending to f17 better (something like variation)?
FR: is ti more urgent to take c3 or b8 now?
FR: now i see, that connection at d6 better fot me.
Black is happy here.
FR: what do you think about simply defending and making points? (r10 or r8)
I like this move.
FR: what do you think about r9 (see variation).
FR: not sure about l16 now. But how to use my sente? What do you think about the marked points as alternative moves? Is there something better?
FR: Here, if I try to defend my small territory in the lower-right, black will build perfect moyo in the center. But how to counter it?  Black's moyo is huge now. Not a big chance to reduce is considerably.
FR: now game seems close by territory (both black and white have around 60-70 points), but black have perfect left-center moyo and I can't see where white can make territory. What to do  do now? Reduce black moyo (A or B)? Or try to make some territory around C? It there any way to attack black (may be there is something in the upper-right, but i can't see good moves there).
This is certainly big invasion.
FR: My mistake :( e7 looks better
oh yeah. I am white. :)
I've always thought that the board position in the variation shown is beneficial and a good fuseki. But in reality, I have not idea why. In the variation, could you tell me what you think of the fuseki, who get's the advantage, development possibilities, ect? Thank you.  R: in the opening, it doesn't really matter much. In the end, it really depends on your style.   Playing 2 low stones aiming to enclose the corners as soon as possible often means your play will be territory oriented. Advantages of this style is that you will have solid bases to extend from and it will be easier to estimate your land.   I think this style is easier on your rank because playing higher for influence such as star pts can be hard to estimate and exact equivalent rewards.
Grr. That bluewriter, always messing with my plans. I didn't expect R4, as he usually plays the opening specified. I think he played here though, because of D3. It seems that it allows black to expand along the bottom side, while discouraging white to do the same. Is that correct?  R: I think his position favours right side not the bottom side.   Having 2 low stones on the right side means any white's move around that area isn't that rewarding. But after he's enclosed the 2 corners - the right side can be a very big moyo, so at this stage you should think about where to make moves that have equivalent in value.   You shouldn't consider jumping into that area to prevent the moyo at this stage where there are bigger pts to play.
I decided I didn't want to play the 3-4, as I was white, and I needed to develop quickly. Also, could C16 have put me at a disadvantage, fuseki-wise? I have a hunch it would.  R: you shouldn't feel the need to develop quickly because you play white - komi is there to make sure it's fair.   However if you want to develop quickly you can look up some 3-3 joseki as it is probably the fastest.   C16 doesn't really put you at a disadvantage. Follow up after C16:  - C16 -> E17 -> D5   four stones working in harmony  - C16 -> D15 -> C9/C10
Ah yes. that bluewriter. What does he think sometimes? I had expected Him to extend along the south to soak up territory. But now I think that he wanted to force me into a bad position. After all, he probably wanted me to extend along the south where my lowness puts me at a disadvantage. Then he could extend along the west! grr!! I won't stand for it!
Chaaaarge!!! *bugle horn*
maybe a little too timid?  R: there's nothing wrong with it if you dont' want to complicate the matter this early.
good move by black, in my opinion.
I knew that D3 was in a bad spot. But it was only one stone, and I could rescue it later after doing some fighting over in the right. Plus, I didn't want that sly bluewriter to control the pace.  R: you should finish settling the corner first because  1) black's invading your influence, u should let him grab the corner.   2) a wasted move is more or less a taboo. Go is about the contest of making the most of each stone.   3) you can look up joseki to get sente if you dont' want black to set the pace.
I think he moved too soon on this one. But I have to admit, it gave him some more territory. luckily for me, he didn't hold on to it. hehe. >:D  R: you should respond to this contact play because - again, your stone at P17 can be a wasted move.
here. I was going for big moyo. I know I'm thin on the upper side and on the west side, but he's even more thin on the south and the east. So if he invades, I reason I can do some damage there.  R: at this stage white's at a big disadvantage in my opinion. Black's basically rob white's lower left corner.   his stones are working together really well.   You should have settled the lower left corner and respond to the upper right.   P16 or C2 are still better alternative.   your moyo isn't as big as you think.
yup. he invades. At this point however, I realized that it probably wouldn't be a good idea to move to the south or east. I thought maybe I should attack the black stone and profit in the process. heh. always a good idea. But bluewriter is a good rival, and he knows the plan I took. it happens a lot in our games, so he was prepared. >_<
reehh??  R: kinda strange to tenuki after making the move. You probably should have make his F17 a wasted move.  If he decides to run that stone, you can benefit simply by chasing it loosely and make full use of your stones.
weird forced exchange. maybe I should have attacked the black stone instead of... well, I can't complain. I have a rather nice wall now. But that stone at Q14 means he can easily limit my influence with it... >_>  R: true, your wall isn't that useful
ah. ok. Now I see the error of my ways. he was fortifying the top so that I couldn't easily counter attack his k17 stone. good job, bluewriter. ;0  R: you can break his right side by the alternative sequence - though not right now but if you have a chance later on.
R: he can just jump into your corner now and black's as good as won.
profit profit. yum yum.
reeeh??
If I played K15, then his J14 would have made it almost impossible to kill his group. he would have succedded in carving out a large piece of my territory. On the other hand, If I play J14, then J16 is in danger... tough odds. In the end, I decided protecting J16 was more important than further attack. was I wrong? black has some mighty good shape here...  R: the problem is that you have that "wall" M16 group as a liability coming into this fight.
R: this isn't a good move, see variation for detail.   this move lacks the punch, too slow and the you actually lose a lot of points with this one.
now even better shape. also, my wall doesn't look too good when it's being crushed from the sides... >_<  R: you blew your chance at making your wall useful :P   now black's attack around C14 area will mean you have already lost.
oh, NOW he decides to defend the bottom right corner.  R: alternatively, black can D12 to attack your D9 group.   C17 to solidify his lead.   P3 means he's already won and doesn't need to do anything extra.
Well, I figure I might as well invade. too can play this game. >:D  R: It's really hard to find a move for white at this stage.   black can R12 for an easy win. then after white's response black can K4.
Hmm... I got a small amount of territory, and he got a good formation. I don't like the way this is turning out.  R: you should have resigned several moves earlier but black's K3's too reserved :) I'd play at K4.
I wanted to get my walls strength back and surround the white area between K10 and Q15. let's see how it went.
he's attacking my R10 stone. heh. not bad, bluewriter, you 'ol dog, you.  R: up to this stage you should have S13
but now I attack you're whole black group. >:D
hmm... this is getting complicated. why can't he just back down for once!?
here, he surprsied me with a devilishly good tesujii that I didn't see, watch: he manages to capture S12 AND connect his stones.
R: you should have read this out - S12 stone means you have no chance at killing this group so why bother?
damn. Not only do I have a very clunky shape that comes back to haunt me, but black has completely invaded the space I wanted to surround!!! but I'm not dead yeat, I tell ya. the game has only just begun. :D
R: bad move - you give black a free and really really good move. Not only he solidify his territory but he's not sealed in either.
R: another bad move.
R: black's response is just as bad - slow, pointless.  he can probe at F4 and build territory at the bottom or C17, C12 etc.
hehe. watch this.
haha!
R: too slow - he should have played here in the first place
This, while an exceedingly dangerous way to play, proved to be my saving grace. It often happens in games between bluewriter and I that stuff like this turns really crazy. Also, this is the point where my fortunes began to turn, and I was able to give him a good run for his money. My fortunes couldn't sail me all the way to the clear land of victory though. Oh well. better luck next time.
he greedily takes the forced bait. >:D
things got tricky here. I almost lost the game right here. but I managed to pull of some incredible stuff. watch:
so far, no good. he's one step ahead of me the whole time.
now, we're talking! >:D
awww... T_T
This is getting dangerous. I'm this close to being forced to resign. brrr! Thinking about it gives me the chills!
an lo and behold, my saving grace!
very poor judgement on his part. :D
haha! false eye!
unfortunately, bluewriter is just as stubborn as I am. if it weren't for O7, this would have been a fight I never could have won. as you can probably see, he is running, AND threatening to capture a large group at the same time, furthermore, if he is successful, he will capture an even LARGER group. yikes.
not good. not good!
T_T
sadly, H11 was a really bad move that I didn't want to have to make. but if I hadn't done so, I would've had too many cutting points. I would have been slaughtered. unfortunately, this is the move that allows him to capture F6.
greedy bastard. not satisfied with just one group. he's got to invade, too!
haha! sucker!
so much for the invasion. :D
hmm... perhaps this is a bit too slow?
he's trying to connect. I'll be damned if I let him.(though he does, actually end up connecting. just not to the upper group. watch:
ack! K11 aji red alert!!!!
I didn't see it yet. thank god he didn't see it either. Although, maybe he did. If I could capture J15, I might have been able to capture the entire corner. nice!
Awww... T_T
aji away.
no he's threatening to connect to the SIDE group! AUGH! It's funny, because this game was all about mutual collaterall damage. he invades me and lives, I invade him and live, and we go back and forth until there's quite little territory left. If only I had been able to connect F6 to a friendly group, the game would have been so close that the victor would've won by very little total territory. shrug.
Halt!
ack! a double threat!
his bamboo joint, while technically a good move, shapewise, is what allowed me get my white group to escape.
of course, he takes the opportunity, unfortunately, to invade som more. T_T
dangerous, but still, he has no eye space. suddenly the game is entirely in my favor. I've got him on the run! hehehe... >D
ouch! Another double threat! apparently, If I reinforce the attack with L14, my J17 group will be in complete danger! argh!!  by the way, do you happen to know who is leading in the balance of territory right now? or who is leading in the balance of power?  by this point, I'm so confused as to who has more territory or power. the situation is complex indeed. mmm.
I decided the kill of a large group would outwiegh the death of a small one. :D was I correct?
I didn't want him coming any closer to that group in the center. In hindsight, I think I was too careful.
this, I thought, was a good move. In any case, it was clear that Black was dead(or so I thought), and this enable me to ultimately claim the entire upper right corner. oh joy!
yose. :D
here it is. The ultimate aji that led to him connecting his group. I certainly couldn't see it. I'm sure it would take a strong player indeed to see it. Far beyond what a mere 8kyu could do. *sigh*...
if would have been pointless to try to cut at O11, because black would have captured the group with N12. damn. there goes my excellent prospects.
heh. And the bamboo joint turns out to be an extremely sage decision after all. >_>
in retrospect, B13 would have been so much better that I can't believe how stupid I was for not seeing it. I have no idea who is ahead right now, but I do now that I need all the territory I can get.
that's a lot of points... wasted... ugh...
once again, we'ere in yose.
haha! there's still a keen fight left, I say!
small forcing move. ;)
boy. he made a fool of himself there. huh? It worked out perfectly in my favor, and allowed me to make the game within 17 points.
stupid! M14 would have been better!
did I need to defend at B9? I can't tell.
well, that was stupid. bluewriter doesn't allow undos. I bet that lost me the game. Now that I think about it, I could have reduced black to only one eye and one false eye, and that entire group in the center would have been mine. Still, I have no one but myself to blame. man, that sucks.
he's a jerk, that bluewriter. he could have made a simple connection, but NOOOOOO! he had to go out fancy. Bastard. >:(
and now he has sente. Jerk!
I think I performed poorly in the endgame. what do you think, mr. reviewer san?
what is the best way to open a handicapped game?  I preffer other options, you may try to attack the corners on: A to H   also, what moves are important when the board is relatively empty? The moves that can give you more space, in this case the ones that attack a corner. Remember, first the corner, next the side and at last the center.
Again, if we use the principle that i wrote (First corner, then sides and last middle) the best move will be one that can ensure the corner for black.
The same for white.
block off black from connecting  The point to block will be A or B. In that way it cut all your stones and let you "floating". Remember that, beside the principle of order, you need to ensure a firm position for yourself. For that case you need the "create a base"  Iike C or D (for white).
The groups are cut on the triangle the stones are dead if you cant make any eyes. I suggest that you look at some better amateur games so you can catch moves that can give you more insights on this case.
i guess that the variation will be better.
This move was unnecesary. Your group is safe. Remember that big groups are alive even if you can see it (it not always like that, but that idea can save you a lot of wasted moves triying to live or to kill a big group.
AS i say before, dont try to sorround a big group. In this case try to take a corner or a side. It can give you more points.
"trying to confine black to corner"  Yes, you do that but as you see, you still doesnt have many territory. Black can attack at A to C so you can lose ground.
Black doesnt do a good job either, you need to supress the enemy. not to let he give you the pace (Advice: Play at your own rithm, dont let the other player give you his pace).
Big mistake from white, good move for black.
Good, give blacks more freedom.
Not good for white. See variation.
Its better this way. See variation.
Good move for black.
"trying to stake out territory in mid-left"  Even if doesnt look. Its a good idea. the best way to live its to expand.
Black doesnt need to play here. See variation
Black can still play en the under side middle hoshi (black point). See variation.
how do you battle an attachment between two stones 'A' and 'B'?  The answer its simple and difficult. Crosscut. If you crosscut the attachment you create to groups for him and for you, so its better to think ahead a little. See variations.
Not too good moves for white.
Big mistake. See variations.
The best way to save a 3 stones groups its in the middle stone.
good For black.
There is no need for that move.
No need. Advice: you cannot kill that its already dead. Dont waste movements on those stones.
Easy cut, black fails to see.
Again, an unnecesary move.
White too, trying to live in the sand its difficult even for the plants. This means, that you dont need to waste moves on opponent territory if you know that cannot live. Remember something very important. DO NOT THINK THAT YOUR OPPONENT WILL MAKE A MISTAKE.
"what is the best way to prevent black from taking territory"  As i say before, white cant live here, so you can secure some territory on the upper side. Like A to C.
Big mistake for black. See variation.
Good move for white. Black need to protect his territory, maybe A will be better. See variation.
Black lose a lot of points and stills doesnt secure his territory.
Unnecesary move.
Unnecesary move for white. Try to think BIG if you go for the small, you cannot win.
Bad for White. See variation.
Wrong move for white. See variation.
Mistakes for both. And black take it all.
Unnecesary move for black.
Too slow. Try Other variations.
Bad move for white, black doesnt need to respond. Remember that if you cannot make eyes on a place, you stones are dead.
Bad moves for blacks. the righ moves. See variation.
tried to acquire territory
Good move for both.
again, how do you battle out an attachment?  Push the opponent to a side where you are strong in this case see variations.
See variation.
Satv [19k]: Hello
Black 6 might be better as a side extension from one of the bottom corners to Q10 or D10, but the move in the center is not bad
Black does not necessarily nedd to respond to White's move at K17. However, Black 12 would be better at H17 or M17 rather than the contact play at K16.
The sequence up to black 18 leaves black with a very strong position and white with two weak groups.
Black should try to profit from White's weak position, rather than kill outright. L16 doesn't really do either. A move at G15 or N14 would strengthen Black's position while White flounders for a foothold (see possible variations).
Black 24 doesn't do much. G16 might be better.
Black 28 doesn't do much either. I like a corner encloser at Q14 or a side extension at around D11 better.
In this case, saving one stone is not that important. I might protect the corner at D17.
This is small and white does not have to respond. A side extension on the left side would be bigger.
This move is not sente and there is really no threat from white playing here.
Black 48 is small, and White does not have to respond.
This is contrary to the Go proverb: "don't play close to thickness". A side extension near D10 is more efficient.
White's move at H14 does nto need to be responded to.
White can be cut at L14 (see variation).
R14 is better
R18 is better.
This move helps White make corner territory (see variation).
This move is unnecessary. White can be cut at P12 (see variations).
This move helps White repair the cut at P12 (see possible variations).
Black needs to watch out for the threat of a ko at O19.
Splitting White's two living groups is unnecessary. Black can be dragged into a ko for the life of his group if White plays at O19.
Protecting a cut at H10 is not necessarry. A play near the star point on the left side would be better.
Locally C12 is better. In general it is not useful to make contact plays agains a weak group.
Black should play at B11 instead (see variation). Connecting at D11 allows white to play at B11.
This is similar to Black 94 at Q18 in that it really only helps white make a stronger position.
Locally C14 is better.
Saving the stone at C6 is not important. C4 is probably better.
A move at B3 threatens to catch the two white stones (see variations).
Locally, white's invasion of the left side is a complete success, and black's group in the lower left has becime unwieldy. However, white's five stones on the bottom are not yet alive.
White's move at P5 seems unreasonable, but Black's response would be better at N6.
(see variation)
This is a big endgame play, but a move at S8 may be bigger (see variation)
the three White stones are already dead, better to play at G9
The game is essentially over at this pont. Black is ahead by at least 15 points.
Still learning opening sequences. I try something different every now and then.  G: Good! Although this is perhaps the most common opening move though - so not exactly new :)
Wasn't really sure, but extending to the right from E4 seemed like the biggest move.
G: Nice plan to attack this stone since W left out the reply, but I think you can go in harder here. One of the marked points for example.
I feel this is too high here... go 3rd row instead.
if you had both D14 and E7 at 3rd line now, D10 would have been nice
again too high - the corners and edges give points - the center not. Now white has 3 corners and you none.
again - if D7 at 3rd line you could take sente now and play q5
Should I have played S10 here?  G: Hmm - you could have attacked more - the center is yours you do not have to worry if you have to run in there... so see variation
again problems  because K16 is not K17 - otherwise would now be a nice extension
This is pointless - you cannot protect the center, you cannot pressure W's C17 group.
I regretted that move after making it, but it didn't work out as badly as I feared...  G: No no - this is fine - you are very strong in the area.
I thought he was going to play N3, but he plaed on the middle right instead.  G: Where would you have played if he played N3? Why didn't you play there anyway if you thought that more urgent... this black group could still run, even if he cut at q11...
N3 is better - leaves less trouble for later
nice - but now you have the trouble again the your "skirt is open" ... i think the saying goes :)
Bad move by white - just ignore :)
If you want to protect your territory H6 or D2 is better - more interesting would be splitting W at O7 - thus setting up S6 or something...
This is just forcing white into your own weak group
In retrospect, this might be the point where things started to go poorly for me - white was building a large territory there.  G: The score guesstimator still puts you ahead by 40 points - it goes badly because W now has no weak groups, so nothing you can attack to make profit. Weak groups are the engine of the game!
Hmm... not very big - see alternatives.
This achieves very little - it goes a bit towards connecting the R13 group - but your moves should always have more than one purpose - also, this is GOTE, W can now do whatever he wants again.
Ugly empty triangle :)
This looks very bad - you have few liberties and ugly shape :)
I'd been hoping to prevent white from living there. This resulted in a long, drawn-out fight.  G: it should be quite easy to kill W... let's see :)
W gives up and takes huge sente points! The endgame has started :)
Perhaps you did not see trouble brewing here, but TAKE THE KO :)
I think this is the point where I realized that barring a mistake on kom's side, I was going to lose this fight.  G: It's true - you are in a bit of trouble now
Not so timid!
ouch.
That didn't wrk out too well. Maybe I should have played N3?
well - you live... but have you looked at the whole board? This might be a good place to resign :)
white mistake - too greedy
not big and not sente - b6 is at least sente ...
AB:If you want to play this extension, it's better to play the hanging connection at G16 instead of F16. Now if white invades at J17, the F17 stones may be under attack.
Should i block at O17 instead ? In "Lessons in the Fundamentals  of go" , block at O17 is count as bad move ,"because it divide  you group into two halfs" (the reason in the book ) . Honestly  , i still cant really understand the reason . Another thing is  that i worried about an invasion at H17 or J17 , which would  make the game into a complete fighting mess .  AB: If you play O17, white won't get a base and will need to escape in the center but you will be separated so you must evaluate whether or not it will be easy for you to take care of the two groups. The play in the game forces white to live at the top, it destroys more of you points, you cannot attack the white stones any longer, but you connect all your stones thickly. So when white invades, you have to estimate which result is better for you. In the game, white already has a two space extension on the right side, so it's difficult for you to make use of thickness if you let white live at the top. See variation if you try P17
AB: White moves after the invasion were a bit odd. This result is really good for you because you have sente and your position is really solid. Now the white group on the right looks weak.
Ab: But this is bad. Contact moves are not attacking moves. When you play contact moves, both sides must defend their stones. So now you have to defend R10 while white becomes stronger, it's not good. To attack this group, it's better to cap at P9 and see what white does. It would be difficult for white live while not making your lowr right corner stronger or letting you have more stones in the center.
The first silly mistake , i "thought" the ladder is working ,  so i didnt read it ....  AB: the stones at Q10 are not strong enough for white to try this plan.
AB: At this point you only have to look after your stones at O13 while white is weak on both sides, it will be hard for white to keep everything.
AB: Good move.
AB: White is looking for trouble again.
AB: Good, you must keep the white stones separated.
AB: but this move is too soft. So far all your stones are strong so you can afford to let black cut here and play a more attacking move like N4 or O6.
AB: you can also play at L4 to attack the two white stones at the bottom. It will be hard for white to defend the bottom and the right side at the same time. You played a very solid P4, you have to make use of it.
AB: You can also attack the bottom..
AB: This is too small. You are already clearly alive on both sides so these stones are not worth than there capture (16 points). If you want to capture them, it's better to aim at making it on a large scale, for example by playing E13. Even if you don't manage to capture them you should get enough compensation while white escues them.
AB: Blunder, must be at M11 so that white cannot squeeze as in the game.
AB: white should sacrifice his stones instead.
see the variation
May be i should just continue to push at  H11? Will it make the white moyo too big ?  From now on , i cant seem to find my mistakes . There are a few moves i made just to ensure that the opponent wont try to overplay (which i hate , because of my poor reading) .  AB: Your move is fine. White gets some sente moves but there is no aji.
AB: looks slow
AB: good direction, but maybe better one line further so that it's easier for you to settle. Here white has many stones around so a pincer may be difficult to handle.
AB: white has no time for this.
AB: Too many white stones around to try this kind of things. Settling the things peacefully by playing D4 or C3 is good enough.
AB: It's better to play the atari at E6 directly
AB: This is too cautious, see the variation
AB: not sure what you are afraid of here. You have one big eye at G2 and one eye at E8 so there is nothing white can do
AB: Better at F10 so that you get a chance to get G12 back.
AB: You should follow up with D1, it's sente. See the variation
AB: You lost some points here.
AB: No reason not to play hane at S7 instead. If white does not answer the best you can do is S7 anyway, by in the game white gets a chance to play it.
AB: Makes more points at H8.
AB: H5 is better
AB: This is dame, white needs H6 and H8 to make a point but he can't get both.
AB: Bad, there is no terriory to make here for both sides, but you end in gote because you have to connect.
AB: Connecting at H9 is one point better.  This is the last comment.
metaperl [21k]: hi
korchoi [17k]: hi gg
I have never encountered someone playing "low" like this... it took me by surprise.  What should I do in response to this?  White has played an uncommon fuseki here. As you may be aware, the 4-4 point is oriented for center-territory and influence, while the 3-3 point is oriented towards securing corner territory. Personally, I can't say white's opening is wrong, but I strongly prefer to be black in this situation. White's stones do secure the corner; but at the cost of slow development. Black, as his stones are higher, have more "potential" for territory and are more flexible.
This move is doable, as it begins to create a framework for black on the lower-left side. However, it is important to play actively, so I would prefer to approach one of white's 3-3 stones. Please see variation.
At this point, look at who has used his stones more efficiently. Black is on the fourth line, and white is on the third line. With a few more moves, who looks to have more territory? With the same amount of stones, black has covered territory a whole line hire. It is important to use stones efficiently, and I believe black has definitely had a better opening here. White's moves are contradictory. In the beginning, he plays the 3-3 points. Now, he plays R10, showing a desire to create a "framework". If white wanted to get territory through a framework, then there was no point in playing the 3-3 in the first place.
Here I feel he played too close to me.  How to punish him for this?  Unfortunately, not all go matches are peaceful. Sometimes, the players play far away from each other, and other times, a move like this will be used to seek complications. However, this move is very valid, and shows white is wanting to start a fight. The most important thing here is to realize that he is (around) the same strength as you and you should not be afraid to fight. In this situation, you get to make the move and can get the advantage in the fight. See variations for different responses.
This is a valid response. It is peaceful, and creates influence facing towards the center. However, it lets white off too easy. Black has the advantage in this situation.
It's important to place more pressure on white. If you hane here, you can cut off white's stone and smother its liberties. There is a proverb "Hane at the head of two stones". It doesn't apply always, but its good advice.
Here he let me walk along the 4th row... that's supposedly a bad thing, but now he owns a lot of territory at the bottom.  Should I have "chased" him horizontally like this?  I think you misunderstand the proverb. Black is on the fourth row, but what "do not push on the fourth line" means is; white shouldn't be on fourth line, with black on the fifth line. If white was on the fourth line and black was on the fifth line, white would have too much solid territory for the tradeoff of black's wall.
Here, you have a wall. But, see the white stone at R10? It "nullifies" the black wall and the chance for it to make territory. Black Blocking at S5, white connecting at S3, and black then moving at R10 would be ideal and would leave black ahead in the game. However, as I said, The white R10 stone is "exactly" where a black stone needs to be, and makes it too easy for white to make a solid base near black's thickness.
I initiate my attack on the low stone  This works, or you can go out again at H3.
It is important to know when to tenuki, or play elsewhere. Is this one stone that white eats important? what if he does? He's already encroached onto the lower right side, there's not much territory for black there since white can jump there at any moment. You don't always have to respond to your opponents move. Sometimes its necessary, but many times it isn't. Lets see if hypothetically this move is ignored.
Here again, he plays to close. I should've realized that he was trying to get the territory near the wall after the first episode, but I did not.
Again, hane is a stronger response. This response is "safe" but also too "timid". Remember, his fighting ability should be around the same level as yours, so there is no need to shy away.
Hane at the head of two stones.
Why not a different move.
Curious to see how he responds to close play, so I played like he did.
Uh oh. Trouble. I only have two liberties for that group.
With this move, he sets up to escape the ladder. But I don't realize what he is doing.
A closed triangle is a good shape.  Yes, but again, cutting is a stronger response.
Ladder still works, try this.
I move to block his remedy of my ladder, but now he has time to escape.  There are two ways of standard techniques of capturing stones; ladders and nets. Always play a net if possible. See variation.
Black has a stronger fuseki. By not utilizing his 4-4 points for power and influence, however; white was let off easy to make territory. Though white ate these stones in the upper left, the game isn't over yet. black still has a lot of potential territory left in the middle. A black move like S5 will close off the center, creating a MASSIVE moyo. Though white can invade, if would be difficult to live in the middle. The winner may very likely hinge on whether or not white is able to live in the center, as it occurs in many games.  The main points for improvement: 1.Don't be timid in your response. Hane (bend) at the head of two stones more often. Yes, you can be cut, but if you play first, then you have the advantage (However, protecting the cut is sometimes important if the opponent is strong nearby). Your opponent only has as much fighting ability as you have (if closely ranked).  There are different playing styles, and some like to play more peacefully, but it is important to play boldly regardless. 2. Know when to tenuki (play somewhere else). So what if he eats one stone, or six? Twelve points in gote isn't much compared to big fuseki points. Getting another fuseki stone can easily be worth as much as 30 points. On the other hand, don't avoid crucial moves. For example, your opponent exploits thin play and destroys your eyes in the corner, allowing him to make territory while you are chased running. The good thing is, many times your tenuki will maintain sente (the opponent cannot ignore your move without a loss). You control the flow of the game and make territory where you want. 3. Learn joseki, and see the reasoning behind it. These lines of plays have been developed by professionals  and are possible BEST moves as a sequence. If you know how to punish mistakes in a joseki sequence, you will benefit.   In short: Play bolder! Don't follow your opponent around, and when you are at a tactical advantage, do not be afraid to play severely.  I GUARANTEE you that improvement in these three areas will lead to an increase in rank of at least several stones. If you have any questions, let me know.  Best of Luck, Jeremy W j3r3mee@yahoo.com
See that huge middle? Black still has a good chance of winning.
ok so he's afraid of the chinese :) It seemed that the way to punish his fear was by claiming 3 corners.
I had mixed feelings about this when I played it. In review I think it is bad... in the game it looked like free points, but really it is aji keshi and "just" points.. w  at o3 is gote, so I should wait.  This isn't aji keshi, but it's not the biggest move on the board yet. It's not aji primarily because white O3 would pretty soon become a big move - it would stabilize her group and limit you to a small corner.
I do get 3 decent corners, but w has influence. so I think, I have not taken advantage of r6. not a single pro game in SmartGo or gobase.org matches the first 4 moves, so it's either a brilliant new move that the pro's haven't discovered yet OR.... it's not so brilliant and I should get at least a few points of advantage somewhere :) Right now the game looks even to me. I blame n3 :)  I agree, personally I would prefer white a little since the exchange of 9-14 seems like a global advantage for white and 15-16 also seems a little favorable for white. For 15, simply playing here would probably be better.
perhaps a would have been better  Yes, I would prefer "A" to this.
seems reasonable I had hoped he would le me play there to counter his influence.
This is not good. Jumping out with E15 or playing a double kakari would be better.
This is way too slow.
and now I get a break
if he's going to respond here he can't play q17
I get out and keep the corner toonow I feel like I might have a slight edge.
yeay a 4th line stone :)  This is big, but perhaps playing P16 first would be better (to prevent white P15 or a shoulder hit)?
this seemed bad to me. he's touching a weak stone
I couldn't decidi if I should attack with the stone I played, or make a base at A.. both also attack f16 group. I chose f10 because I felt that my central problem in this game was countering w's influence.... I've got almost 4 corners of territorry.  Why not play "B" and spoil White's shape, then play here next for a double threat?
I couldn't see all the variations but I felt that this was asking a bit much... I was sure that I could get a lot out of attacking d8 now
I hadn't quite figued on this bein a corner killer but since I get sente...
points wise this is at least even if not slightly better I thought I was quite ahead now but white does a good job of using aji now :(  Actually, I'm pretty sure white got the better part of the trade.  You started out with about 12 pts in the corner, but white erased that and got about 16 pts in sente. Assuming you had captured white's three stones, you would have had about 18 pts, a net loss of 8 pts for you, with gote.
not having seen the vars this seemed like a nice dual pupose defese/attack, bu later I regret not defending simple. A becomes free for w later  Yes. I would immediately play at E14 to force white into a bad shape
Bad for black until the cut at G17 is protected.
the shape sucks but he ca't catch it  and it wll ruin all ousude potential if chased
so again i feel I should be winning here w has a weak grp inside and I hould get to reduce w's influence heavily by chasing it, maybe even kill it
argh the free move! (that wasn't really free, see var :(
so I run sucessfully now
surprised me
sinprejic [2k]: thanks booing [2k]: thx sinprejic [2k]: good game (w lost n time)
I wasn't sure whether this or the enclosure at A was better.  This is possible, when black B, white can play A or C. Probably E is slightly better since white has a perfect extension to F.  When white A black will play D. This is also playable.
Is it better to play a pincer or something like A or B?  Depends on what you want, play A for territory however I would not recommend it now. See alternatives.
I do not like this move. Prefer to play at A to keep the left open.
Wrong, better is..
This move does not seal off the left side.   Probably better to play A.
This pincer seems natural.  I do not like this move, the area where whit has to make territory is on the left, not on the bottom half of the board. Also you played A so your intension was to get territory on the left, stick to this idea. Strengthen the left side will also make an invasion of black at B harder for him.
This moves destroys whites changes to a moyo on the left.
This seems a little unreasonable to me, but is might be possible due to the weakness of the marked stone.  Still, this position seems perfect for a splitting attack.  I don't really know the right way to execute it, though.  This is when the game started to go bad, it feels.  Well there is a lot of aji on the left so black can play here. However this move comes too soon,  A is much better, it makes territory, attackes the white group and by doing so strengthens the 3 black stones.  When white answers with C, black B or D and white has a very tough game.
This move is too one sighted it is only aimed at protecting your territory on the left. Playing A will give you a splitting attack on 2 groups.
This should probably be at 33.  There is no way for white to attack the black group. I think you made the best choice to give a way the 2 white stones.
Black does not have a weak group now.
It seems pointless to try to escape. Should this be left for later?  I did finish in gote.  This is a big move, if black plays here or at A, this corner is at least 35 points of territory. This is more then white gained on the left site.  So timing is okay, I think the problem lies with move 26.
Probably better one space above this.  You need to break out, although it is painfull black can play A.
I do not like this move, if black plays 38 you can always defend the cut with A
What is the right way to attack here?  I had intended to chase the black stones to the left, to take territory on the bottom and become able to reduce or invade the left.  As you'll see, it didn't quite work.  Another possibility is A. For black to slide into the corner does not really help him so he has to get out.
This is a good nove, white has no real possibilities to attack black.
This looks bad now, but what would be better?
I had hoped to play in this area first.  Now, black has left his group weak in the center, but again, I don't know how to attack it properly.  Game has become difficult for white. White has app. 40 points of territory, black has at least 40 and a moyo on the leaft side that might give him another 30 points.  A is probably the best move, it attacks black and makes an invasion on the left more feasable.
The idea here is to drive black to the left, so I can destroy his framework.
Again, black leaves himself weak, but what to do?  Kill the black stones, 61 is unreasonable, black should get out. How to kill is difficult. Maybe a move at A first is better.
This was never going to work.
Better at A.
Must be at A to play the ko to live.
Better at A to prevent the cut.
Is there a way to kill black now?  I think A kills the group.
Since I wasn't going to kill black anyway, this should probably just connect.  Too much bloodlust.
Black A exposes white's weakness much more.
Black is alive, so no use to play her . This moves costs you 5 points. Better Q6.
I feel like I'm behind now, so I tried something drastic.  Is there a better place to play?  This fight, like the last one, I have no useful comments on. If you see any glaring or small mistakes, feel free to comment.  Well let's count to see if you are behind: White: Top left:   6 points Top right:  6 points Left side:  18 points Centre and bottom: 5 points So in total: 35 points Black: Top:  26 points Centre:   10 points left corner: 26 points Total:  62 points  So you must kill a large group of black.The 5 black stones are the only possibility.
Black should play at A this will secure the left side. White will gain nothing from the cut.
I like a move at A more however with this one you cannot cut black but you will pull out the white stones.
If black just connected, I was going to resign, probably.
A little hope.
I think black could start a ko instead.
Better for black to play at A directly.
Better at A?
Too small.
Should be at A. After white B black C.
This sequence costed black another 10 points, you are getting closer.
Obviously not big enough.  This should be in the lower left somewhere. I wonder if I lost the game here, and not earlier.  You lost the game earlier but prior to this move you had a change to get back into the game again. Without komi you are now still behind (about 15 points, when not counting any points for the marked area).
This shouldn't work, should it?
The game seems about over after this.  I think so to I estimate you are at least 20 oints behind now.
Should this be at A?  A will capture the to marked stones.
This doesn't work.
Better at A.
Time pressureblindness.  Yes this moves cost you 2 points and sente.
This is pointless, as black has to defend eventually, anyway.
Game commented by Niall for B.  Overall assessment: both players made reasonable moves from their own points of view, but often failed to respond sufficiently to the other players moves, by attacking before developing. Examples include moves 5, 16, 32,33 and 37.
unconventional, because it's too easy for B to live inside.
I don't like this, because it makes it too easy for W to take a big chunk of the top.
It doesn't look like the most urgent point, but it is sente. It could turn the TL into B territory, but make a big framework for W.
Big, but not big enough - should be somewhere round P17
Good.
I would have played P17, but this may be viable.
Good.
Since B has played R16, he should go on and play S16 now.
Better to attack the lone W stone first, say with Q3 or M3. This makes it too easy for W.
No, you must cut between the stones - W can live in the corner but he'll live small and you can attack the O3 stone. See variation.
I would take the Q16 stone first.
Bad. O13 would have been better, keeping sente.
More urgent to save the N11 group. See variation.
Good.
E4 first
I would play C10 and damn the torpedoes!
Save N13 first
Should be L4
Has to be H3.
B should cut at D10 - see variations. It leads either to a game-deciding ko or to B winning. B is losing otherwise, so the ko is a good option.
That's quite big, but I think B's only chance to win is to attack the W P13 group. It's not clear to me it has 2 eyes. See variation for an example.
a little too hopeful - pulling out at G11 would have been better.
No more comments - B has lost.
moshes [20k]: Hi, good luck and enjoy the game.
DrPepperJo [18k]: u 2
hello! my name is gius up to here you developed very well  if you like a more territorial result you can play K3 and R10
OK this leads to loss of sente so I probably shouldn't have done it, should have just played elsewhere.  true, A6 is a yose move ending gote white A5 instead is sente, then A5 is privilege of white and black A6 is reverse sente  in fuseki play fuseki moves, as k10 or C17
very bad moves by white
Maybe at this point I could have been more ambitious, but I'm not sure where...  C17 is still good, or you take your last corner
you draw a line connecting the more external stones of white moyo and a move in the center of this line is perfect
This move I feel is over cautious.  Would K7 have been a better spot?  when you have this kind of doubts, divide the goban in two parts  as you see you have more then half goban, then at this moment the game is ok for you  if you play a move in the white half part is even better
very good
Clearly I was trying to expand my potential territory but I think I should have been more ambitious.  I see but remember that you can be invaded in both sides  then or there is an exchange of invasions or you have to protect your territories
This I think is wrong, I should have gone to N11, not made yet another weak stone.   O14 is a very good move, reducing the liberties of white group
Gives up sente for a cut that obviously won't work.  :(   true
I think I was too defensive here, should have gone to J4 instead  yes
Bad mistake, should have been G3
B13 is a mistake, has to be C13
This was a mistake, I shouldn't have backed down I think.
white has 3 cutting points
pointless, not going anywhere, just a good way to lose sente.  it is wrong
I was feeling desperate.  yes M4 was a bad mistake, it happens :-(  but the value of this game is probably to learn how to draw lines for reductions  have nice games!  ciao
moshes [20k]: I don't think I have any worthwhile moves left DrPepperJo [18k]: so pass, i'll pass too
cook777 [5k?]: Hi :)
quindo [12k?]: hi, good luck!
cook777 [5k?]: Thanks you too.
quindo [12k?]: not that you need it... :-D
cook777 [5k?]: well I could have bad luck then I would need it. :)
quindo [12k?]: good point... cook777 [5k?]: hmm  SC Black's top right group is not as secure as white's.  Black has a cutting point at Q18 and could lose the stone at R18.  Since this is early in the opening, trading the stone at R18 to play first in the lower right corner isn't a bad idea.  The important point is that black should realize the trade off being made here.  Playing this stone in the lower right implies black is not going to work very hard to save the stone at R18 if white tries to cut.  If black really wants to save the stone at R18, then this stone should be played at Q18 or P18.
cook777 [5k?]: lets see how it goes :) quindo [12k?]: lets see....  SC This is not the best move.  Before this move, both groups in the upper right corner were reasonably stable.  So, white doesn't need to play here to secure his stones.  This is still the opening game and all 4 sides have large open spaces.  The current move is more of a mid-game type move.  A good rule of thumb for the opening is to look for the largest open space and play somewhere in it.  The bottom and left sides are both good choices currently.  Any of the squares would be reasonable opening game moves.
quindo [12k?]: i think thats my best bet  SC This move implies black is sacrificing the stone at R18, and probably the stone at Q17 in exchange for making a wall and keeping white out of the top side.  This is consistent with black's previous move since both lean towards sacrificing the stone at R18 to gain something elsewhere.  See the two variations for other black options at this point.
SC This move is fine, but it sets up a more complicated fight in this corner.  If black wants this sort of fight, then this is a good move.  The point is that black should be makeing a conscious decision to fight rather than just reacting.  See variation.
quindo [12k?]: i didn't see that
cook777 [5k?]: I did not either intill jus tnow.  SC This is a contact fight.  Once a contact fight is started, you normally should continue until all of your groups are either dead or secure.  Secure generally means the group has 6 or more liberties.  This stone isn't in contact with any of the other stones, so it isn't really a contact fight type move.  See variation for a more standard contact fight.
SC The marked white stone is caught in a ladder that ends at A5.  Black needs to watch for white to play a ladder-breaker somewhere between these two points.
SC White's marked stones are now one secure group with 7 liberties. Black's marked stones are one group for now since the single white stone is dead, at least until white plays a ladder breaker. This group has enough liberties to be secure for the moment but black will need to do some actual connecting later.  So, this would be a good time for black to take Sente and play somewhere else.  This is still the opening phase of the game and there are still large areas of open space on the board.
SC This secures the cutting point at O15.  Even without this move, however, white can't capture the two marked stones.  This move just gives white sente without accomplishing much.  See Variation.
quindo [12k?]: I am sai :-D  SC Good, white is playing away from the upper right corner.
quindo [12k?]: lol  SC This move attacks white rather than secure the lower right corner for black.  Since white can run towards the strong white group in the upper right, an attack by black probably won't accomplish much.   Securing the corner by playing at one of the squares is better.  By the end of the game, black has lost this corner.
SC This is rather low.  I think the square would be better.
cook777 [5k?]: Then I am cooked!
SC White's marked stones don't have room to make eyes where they are.  Since black did not secure the lower right corner, white can dive in under black.  This will save white's stones and take the corner away from black.  White could also continue to run up the right side.   Since white has 2 choices of escape and black can only block one at a time, white's stones are not in immediate danger.  So, it is reasonable for white to play away from the lower right at this time.  See variations for both options.
cook777 [5k?]: Are you sure you are not a sandbagger? quindo [12k?]: yes  SC This response is best for securing part of the left side rather than the corner.  Either of the squares would be better if black wants to secure the corner.
quindo [12k?]: I have only played go for the time i have know you pretty much quindo [12k?]: d17 is tempting...  SC White now has control of this corner.
SC This continues blacks strategy of taking the left side.
quindo [12k?]: what is a sandbagger?
cook777 [5k?]: you said your sure you are not one but you do not know what one is. lol
quindo [12k?]: lol, i am guessing sandbagger is a really good player that says I am a noob! who wants to play me!  SC I would say this is the end of the opening phase of the game. The mid-game should be spent securing your own groups and expanding your territory while attacking your opponent's groups and shrinking his territory.
SC All of black's stones in the lower right are on the 4th line or higher.  This arrangement does not secure the corner for black.  I think either of the squares is a better response to white's move.    The triangle is also a reasonable response.  This prevents a white invasion of the corner from the stone at R6.  With the corner secure, black can attack white's K4 stone better.
cook777 [5k?]: very close that can be one too. cook777 [5k?]: someone that is stronger but bertend to be weaker.  SC This stone doesn't secure the lower left corner.  It doesn't continue to pressure black's lower right corner.  It also doesn't prevent an invasion of the left lower side.  See the variation starting next move for an example of how black could invade the left lower side.  Playing at K3 helps secure the left lower side at least as well as the actual move.  Plus, K3 threatens to undercut black's high position in the right lower corner.
cook777 [5k?]: In your case that what you said is exatly what I meant. :) quindo [12k?]: i think i have run into some of the direct opposite lol  SC This looks like an attempt to connect black's top right and top left groups.  Since both groups are strong, they don't need to be connected.  This move doesn't really threaten white's top left stones either.  So, this move doesn't accomplish much.  I think that all of the marked spots would be better moves for black.  The squares are all good defensive moves.  They help protect territory that black would like to claim.  The triangles are all reasonable moves to attack white.  See variation for an example of an invasion at F3.
quindo [12k?]: ah, i was thinking about playing there my last move... cook777 [5k?]: I like G14 better :)  SC The center is very poor for making territory.  So, white should not play here expecting to increase his territory.  This could be used to attack one of black's weak groups.  If black has a weak group that can't make eyes, it would have to run out into the middle and connect to a strong black group to live.  A white stone here would help prevent this.  Black doesn't have any weak groups, however.  So this stone doesn't have a good purpose.  I think that the marked spots are all better moves for white.
cook777 [5k?]: umm someone I knwo would like to join the game so I tald him I as you if he can. quindo [12k?]: thats fine  SC See my comments on white's last move.  This stone doesn't make territory, doesn't attack white, and doesn't connect weak black groups.  So it has not real purpose.  I think the marked spots are all better moves for black.
quindo [12k?]: as long as there is no kabitzing  SC This makes a black 3x3 point invasion of the lower left corner impossible.  So it secures the corner for white even though it isn't actually in the corner.  Since it also moves up the left side, it is a nice move.
quindo [12k?]: heard of emptytriangle.com?  SC Black is still playing too high.  This move makes it easy for white to undercut black's left side stones.  If black wants to secure the left side, C8 is better.   Since white has a secure corner, the current move is not an effective way to attack the maked white stones.
cook777 [5k?]: hmm sounds like I heard it umm what is it?
quindo [12k?]: a go webcomic  SC This is still too high to block white from expanding further up the left side.  The squares are both better.  I know the square at C10 is on the 3rd line from the left side, like black's actual move.  So C10 is just as high as black's actual stone.  The C10 move works to block white because it is connected to the existing black stone at D10.
quindo [12k?]: now i can't make a box :-(  SC More center moves with no good purpose.  I think the marked moves are all better for white.  The only good thing this stone does is break the ladder traping the white stone at N16.  So, if white played here to free that stone, then this would be an OK move.  White invasion of the lower right corner at S3 has been covered in a previous variation.  See the variations on this move for examples of how to play A11 and M3
quindo [12k?]: actually thats false  SC This stone un-breaks the ladder, so the white stone at N16 can't escape now.
SC White is trying to make a group in the center.  This is very difficult because you have to enclose all 4 sides.   A better idea is to connect these center stone to one of white's side groups.  An even better idea is to stop wasting time playing in the center and attack black's left side and right lower corner areas.
SC Black doesn't need to spend time trying to kill white's center group.  With all of the black stones facing the center, white will never be able to make much center territory even if white does live.  The purpose of the game is to make territory.  So, trying to actually kill white is not the important issue.  Black should just try to keep white from connecting to any side groups.  The triangles all good options for blocking white.  The squares are all good options for black to increse his amount of territory.  Black doesn't really have any secure territory at this point.    Both the left side and bottom right corner are wide open for attack and reduction by white.    The areas around M18 and M16 will probably black territory eventually, but they are not secure yet.  At the end of the game, black ends up with only 1 point of territory at N16 plus the captured white stone in this area.
SC Black is playing a contact fight against white's center group. A contact fight is normally not the best way to kill a group, however.  A contact fight tends to strengthen both player's groups. So, a contact fight is best when you have a weaker group and your opponent's group is stronger.  Making your weak group strong helps you.  Making your opponent's strong group strong doesn't help him.  The best way to kill white's group, if you really want to, is to block it from escaping to any of the sides.  A center group is more likely to make life by connecting to a strong side group than by making eyes in the center.  At the end of the game, white had made eyes in the center; but white had to connect to the lower left corner to avoid being captured.
cook777 [5k?]: teamochi says you are winning.  SC Since white's center group is weak, a contact fight is good for white.
SC This is a better sort of move for black.  It is not a contact move.  Instead, it helps blocks white from connecting to the marked stone.
quindo [12k?]: that shouldn't last to long  SC This is a contact move again.  Black is trying to save the two marked stones.  Those stone are in trouble because black played them in contact with white.  Another very good option here is for black to start playing along any of the sides to start making territory.  The last time black played close to a side was move number 43 at C9.  The current move is the 6th stone black has played since then.  How much more territory does black have now than he did at move 43? The marked white stone will probably keep black from making more than 1 or 2 points of territory around K14. The area around E9 could become about 6 points of territory when black finishes enclosing it, which, however, will require more black stones. So, black has gained about 8 points for the past 6 moves.  Save the 1 point moves for the endgame where they belong.
SC White is trying to get around black blockade and connect with the bottom white group.
SC Black attacks a false eye.  The marked black stones already make this a false eye.
cook777 [5k?]: Do not be serprised if he ask you for a game one day :) quindo [12k?]: lol  SC White should focus on saving the majority of the stones in this center group.  White should sacrifice the two marked stones and follow up on the attempt to escape from the center started last move by the stone at L8.  See variation for an example of how this might go.
SC Black blocks white again.  This leaves black with a cutting point at K7.  See variation.
SC Black has already blocked white from connecting to the lower side.  Black could use this move to fix the cutting point at K7.    If black wants to kill white, the playing around M10 is better for destroying white's eye space.  As always, the squares are all better moves for black than anything in the center.
SC This is a better move for black.  It does not contact any white stones but it threatens white's entire group much more than black continuing the contact fight at N7.
quindo [12k?]: maia ^^  SC This keeps white from making an eye at J10.
quindo [12k?]: i knew you would see that... cook777 [5k?]: What is maia? quindo [12k?]: i think thats how its spelled...  SC White has no stones around B12, so running this way won't help white much at all.  This move does not help white make any eyes since the marked black stones will make an eye around G11 false.  So, this move doesn't really help white.  Playing at M10 is better.  See the variation.
SC M10 is a good place for black to play.
quindo [12k?]: if one player takes a the otehr take b and vice versa cook777 [5k?]: ok
quindo [12k?]: its some of the few go termalogy i know
SC This strengthens white's right side stones, but they were already stronger than the white's center stones.  White has played so many stones in the center that he can't afford to lose them now.  So, white should focus on saving these stones.
cook777 [5k?]: ya I do not know if its spelled righ or not I just know it when I see it in a go book. quindo [12k?]: this situation has gotten crazy...  SC This is a very nice blocking move by black.  Now white has no obvious way to connect to the right side stones.  Black has already closed off any obvious escape towards white's bottom left stones.  Now it looks like white will need to make 2 eyes in the center to live.
cook777 [5k?]: oh?  SC N10 is better since it encloses space for white to start making eyes.  This move would be good if there were white stones in the top right that white's center group could connect to.  See Variation
quindo [12k?]: i need to keep you from making 2 eyes...
cook777 [5k?]: yup :)
SC L13 is better since it starts to make an eye around M12.  See variation
quindo [12k?]: you didn't see it?
quindo [12k?]: i think you missed a path to free life  SC Black should consider ignoring white's center group and making territory on the side.  If this white group does live, it will probably have less than 6 points of territory.  So, if black stops attacking and lets white live, then black has given white about 6 points.    White can make the center group unconditionally alive by playing at the squares.  There are other ways for white to secure this group, but this is a reasonable example.   Since white has to play 3 stones in the center to secure the center group, black will, at some point, get to play 3 stones on the sides without white responding.  If black can gain more than 6 points using these 3 'free' moves on the side, then black is better off letting white live in the center.  Each of the triangles should shift the score 6 or more points in black's favor.
cook777 [5k?]: maybe we will have to look.
quindo [12k?]: ya...
SC This is a dame point.  This means playing here doesn't change the score.  Perhaps white is hoping that black will no see the need to play at J11.  Otherwise, white could accomplish about a much by passing.
quindo [12k?]: see maia
cook777 [5k?]: How long have I know you again? quindo [12k?]: idk, a little after i registered on ogs quindo [12k?]: now, how to save those 2 stones...
quindo [12k?]: your fri left  SC An empty triangle is a bad shape.  This means that making a empty triangle is almost always not your best move.  In general, the only time an empty triangle is good is when you are making eyes.  So, if you are considering a move that makes an empty triangle, stop and look carefully for a better move.  See variation.
quindo [12k?]: i think i might get this game reviewed by someone...
quindo [12k?]: looking at the board it comes down to this, if white finds life white wins, if white doesn't black wins quindo [12k?]: hmm... cook777 [5k?]: That is waht I intended form the start :) quindo [12k?]: i am not good enough at reading to read it out... quindo [12k?]: so i just need to choose the move i think gives me the best chance
quindo [12k?]: O.o cook777 [5k?]: Not what you were thinking was it? :) quindo [12k?]: no, it looks like a bad move to me...
SC Playing at E7 is better.  This is the move that begins to set black up to have a large group of threatened stones around G5.  When white connects at E7, black's stones around H7 are cut off from the stones around E9  See variation
cook777 [5k?]: I will tell you a secret after this game is over :P quindo [12k?]: i think i see now quindo [12k?]: what you were and are trying to do quindo [12k?]: so, why did your friend leave? cook777 [5k?]: well lest try and see what happnes :) the secret is nto what I am trying to do. :)  SC If white places a stone on M11, his center group will be alive with 2 eyes.  If black plays on M11 first, then white only gets 1 eye.  See variation
cook777 [5k?]: I do not know he did nto say.  SC is the other key move in black's destruction.  This move threatens to cut black's stones around G7 away from the right lower corner.
SC Black must sacrifice the two marked stones to save the rest. Don't expect to save all of your stones.  Sometimes playing a sacrifice stone on purpose is useful.  At other times, you have to let your opponent have a few of your stones to save the rest.  When white plays at K6 next trun, black's stones around G7 are cut off and in serious trouble.  Black should play on K6 first.  In the request for a review, black asked how his group of stones could have been saved.  The short answer is don't play this move. The point is that it is easy to get focused on the local situation (save two threatened stones) and forget to step back and look at the whole board situation (my weak group is about to be cut off).  Black and white have both spent most of the game playing each move within 2or 3 spaces of the opponent's last move.  Often, there will be a place on the other side of the board that is worth more than playing right next to your opponent's last stone.  See variation.
cook777 [5k?]: jsut that he had to go.
cook777 [5k?]: *talks to him on skybe.* quindo [12k?]: lol
quindo [12k?]: now i need to find life ;-p
SC Black needs to think about making 2 eyes.  Playing at J6 makes 1 eye right away.  See variation.    This was the last move for black where I could find a variation that saved black's stones.  So, as best I can tell, black is doomed after this turn unless white makes an error.
cook777 [5k?]: My gut says there is life. quindo [12k?]: the trick is finding it...
cook777 [5k?]: I think that is it.
quindo [12k?]: now i just need to make sure i don't mess up... cook777 [5k?]: you know if that lives I could be in really hot watter. quindo [12k?]: i am going to make a horrible shape now cause i think it leades to life
cook777 [5k?]: Maybe I should have overplayed? :( quindo [12k?]: whats overplayed mean? quindo [12k?]: leave opening a weak player can't see?
cook777 [5k?]: Form what I understand its a move you knwo its bad but if your opp does nto answer right you get the advantige. cook777 [5k?]: but I am not good at hsi kind of thing. quindo [12k?]: thats kindof what i said...  SC Black still has 1 eye a H6
cook777 [5k?]: ya but I am just saying I am not 100% sure that is what it means I just hear it used and that is what I got form it. quindo [12k?]: now i think i am dead... cook777 [5k?]: I think so too. cook777 [5k?]: But I could be missing soemthing. cook777 [5k?]: I really need to work on my reading.
SC Cutting at K3 doesn't work for black.   See variation.
cook777 [5k?]: I think you should have cut. quindo [12k?]: hmm... i was thinking about it
quindo [12k?]: i think its time for me to resign
cook777 [5k?]: taht is ok we can countinue if you like. Ist up to you.
quindo [12k?]: lets continue  SC This move starts to cut off the white stones around K3.  This could result in a huge capture race.
quindo [12k?]: i forgot, its not 30 secound overtime yet O.o cook777 [5k?]: I add time to your clook it was. quindo [12k?]: oh...
cook777 [5k?]: I think D2 was a little better for me. :)
cook777 [5k?]: I WANTED THAT! quindo [12k?]: lol cook777 [5k?]: M1 forget m1 !
quindo [12k?]: ? cook777 [5k?]: I do not think I need M1.  SC White's group around K3 can now make 2 eyes.  See variation.
cook777 [5k?]: If so then I could have played O5
quindo [12k?]: O.o
quindo [12k?]: i was joping you would play n1...
cook777 [5k?]: I still get my two eyes I think.
cook777 [5k?]: umm Can you add time for me?
quindo [12k?]: there, i didn't know how to cook777 [5k?]: in options
cook777 [5k?]: thanks
cook777 [5k?]: The secret is out
quindo [12k?]: you saw it :-(
cook777 [5k?]: oh so you saw it and was hoping I did nto see it?
quindo [12k?]: ues
quindo [12k?]: there are two eyes quindo [12k?]: :-( cook777 [5k?]: ya it was there all this time.  SC The space at L11 is actually a false eye.
quindo [12k?]: however, if i had know you couldn't make life another way i would've tried to force you into cappturing a dead group quindo [12k?]: dead shape i mean
quindo [12k?]: thats what you would try to do right?
cook777 [5k?]: I am a little lost ^^
quindo [12k?]: ok.
quindo [12k?]: i have barley anything... cook777 [5k?]: so you knwo I could make life with M11 you just hid that fact.
cook777 [5k?]: Yes you but your how game in your moyo.
quindo [12k?]: ???   I don't know, i just knew you could make life another way.
cook777 [5k?]: Why is that? quindo [12k?]: so i didn't look very hard
quindo [12k?]: ???
quindo [12k?]: i didn't look hard for m11... cook777 [5k?]: Why did you have the feeling I could make life another way? quindo [12k?]: because i have a dead group!!!!!!!!!
quindo [12k?]: 3 moves kills it and gareentee's life
cook777 [5k?]: oops I mis read something you ever hear of a false eye? quindo [12k?]: yes, thats why its dead.  If black connects at F5, a capture race begins that would decide the game.  See Variation
quindo [12k?]: YOU DIDN"T SEE THAT! LOL!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! cook777 [5k?]: not at all quindo [12k?]: thats waht you said... cook777 [5k?]: I guess you can call me a go cluts. cook777 [5k?]: nope
cook777 [5k?]: I said I had life quindo [12k?]: cook777 [5k?]: oops I mis read something you ever hear of a false eye? quindo [12k?]: then you played f5, a worthless move.  SC White should capture at F5.  This allows white to connect his center group to the lower left corner.  This connection avoids the capture race shown in a previous variation.  If white doesn't connect to the lower left corner, black can fill the liberties marked with squares and then capture at the false eye.
quindo [12k?]: another worthless move?  SC If white plays this stone at E5, he is safe.
cook777 [5k?]: I think when I played t5 that was to stop you form makeing life.
cook777 [5k?]: J18 bigger quindo [12k?]: t5? quindo [12k?]: oh f5? quindo [12k?]: it was dead even if i played f5 cook777 [5k?]: Then I do nto reamber we will have to look at the game.  SC black's group around G4 was dead long before white played at F5.  The capture at F5 is important for white, however.
cook777 [5k?]: Hopefally I will not make so many mistakes in that game. cook777 [5k?]: review* quindo [12k?]: yes...
quindo [12k?]: time
quindo [12k?]: this has been a long endgame
cook777 [5k?]: b13 not needed. quindo [12k?]: i guess not, just kindof rushing];W[kb
cook777 [5k?]: Why is that?
quindo [12k?]: cause this has been the longest game of go i have ever played
cook777 [5k?]: lol
cook777 [5k?]: I do nto thinkit was that long :P quindo [12k?]: It is for me...  I only played 19x19 on ogs, ganjugo, and this game
cook777 [5k?]: you played kgs 19x19 before. quindo [12k?]: i did?  SC Black needs to play this stone at O6.
quindo [12k?]: oh ya... cook777 [5k?]: wrong move quindo [12k?]: ? quindo [12k?]: so it was maia...
cook777 [5k?]: n6 should be at o6
quindo [12k?]: i see...
quindo [12k?]: i didn't think what it would be if you played p6
cook777 [5k?]: I am more intested in why you did nto play o6.  SC Black's stones here are dead, so this move does not improve black's score.
cook777 [5k?]: Now that is LIFE.
quindo [12k?]: ? you let me live/ quindo [12k?]: oh, nvm cook777 [5k?]: pertending to be a noob again :) quindo [12k?]: nope quindo [12k?]: i am just tired
cook777 [5k?]: wow just by a 19x19?
quindo [12k?]: O.o why did i play there? cook777 [5k?]: I do nto knwo that does not even have one eye cook777 [5k?]: ok I think I do know. cook777 [5k?]: you forgot it was dead and was going though the motions of endgame.
cook777 [5k?]: ok I was going thogh the mostions of endgame XD quindo [12k?]: lol
quindo [12k?]: just cause it was a worthless move doesn't mean you didn't need to answer  SC I like that phrase.  It is a good idea to keep in mind.
cook777 [5k?]: yes sir!
quindo [12k?]: didn't work the way i wanted tho... quindo [12k?]: still dead... cook777 [5k?]: ya
cook777 [5k?]: *wipes sweet of his head.* quindo [12k?]: lol quindo [12k?]: it could have been bad tho cook777 [5k?]: thiswell yes but I would have still won I think. quindo [12k?]: yah... cook777 [5k?]: this is the net we do not need to feel in dame. quindo [12k?]: ?
cook777 [5k?]: they are the places that you are feeling now.
cook777 [5k?]: ya that is right I think its like one point diff. quindo [12k?]: that ended my plan...
cook777 [5k?]: ok I will answer.
quindo [12k?]: do you see what i tried by fillin the dames? cook777 [5k?]: Does that shape mess with your mind? :) cook777 [5k?]: umm not really. quindo [12k?]: i could have killed the center if you hadn't played c5 cook777 [5k?]: hoep I did nto play C5? quindo [12k?]: even tho there are two eyes, one of the groups only connected to one. cook777 [5k?]: Go is not about I hope my opp does nto see that. quindo [12k?]: i know.
HeNine [19k]: tebi tudi
Before you play some moves, you should ask yourself if they're necessary. Q-15 isn't necessary to protect anything on the top side and makes an over-concentrated shape.
schrody [5k]: nasvet: koti so najbolj pomembni, potem stranice, in danje sredina
schrody [5k]: zadnje*   Remember that you don't have to kill everything in this game. Sealing white in with looser moves will give you greater profit.
Moves like this should be reserved for endgame. It's gote, which means your opponent doesn't need to respond.A move like this is only worth 1-2 points, and there are much more open areas of the board to play in.
Helping the C-8 stone isn't very good. You already have a stone at D-10. As you can see, D-6 stone is very weak and needs more help.  Also note that before playing here, the C-8 stone has 3 liberties and the D-6 stone has 2. Counting liberties is a simple way of determing which stones are weak.
schrody [5k]: ne branit vsega, za neki se odloči ostalo pa pusti
I see that you play a lot of slow and contact moves, like this. When you contact your opponent's stones, they become stronger. If you're trying to attack this group, you should do so from a distance with something like K-8
slodango [1d]: ufff tipič šrody stil
slodango [1d]: self atari
Is my Fuseki and the apporach correct?  R: Yes, looks reasonable.
R: This move looks like a mistake, white must take care of the corner. The most popular reply for white is at A. B is also possible.  R: In addition to that, this move leaves a weakness. If white really feels like sacrificing the corner, C is better (although still not really good).
R: Very good. This already looks bad for white. The corner is at least completely sealed in, if not already dead.
Is that the correct answer or is there better move to exploit the white position in the second line?  R: I would play on the fourth line for more influence, but I can't really say your move is bad either. I think it's a just matter of taste.  R: The white formation on the left side is a bit strange. Not only is there a stone on the second line, the triangled stone seems a bit misplaced. Assume white gets an enclosure at the squared point. Then the triangled stone looks too close. Also it looks a bit too far from the second line stone, so perhaps you'll have a chance to invade later.  R: This kind of move is called "underplay". White played a move that gains less than possible. You don't need to do anything to "punish" this. White already handed you some points for free, so just continue as usual.
I think this move not necessary  R: Yes, no need to play in this corner. If you want to eliminate aji, playing solid at E2 would look a bit better, but I would not play in this corner at all.  R: With P14, white announced he wants a big moyo. This is inconsistent with R9 and S13, which are very low. You should exploit this. See variation.
I think this is a bad answer to White 16. How to split efficiently the square white stones?  R: Never touch the stones you are attacking. See variation.
Here I rushed. I think circle position are better, aren't they?  R: Yes.
Is it possible to separate the two square stones?  R: That's the wrong question. The question should be: Do I want to seperate the two stones? Why not just attack them both? See variation.  R: That's also the reason why the previous move should have been on the third line. It makes it much harder for white to escape.
R: See variation.
Here I did not know where play. Please can you tell me what is the most efficient move and why?  R: Locally, the move is fine, but now that you let white off the hook that easy on the top side, the bottom right moyo is starting to look scary. It's not easy, but I would try some invasion.
The same question for this two stones: can I separate them efficiently?  And was it a good idea to separate or should I defend and make territories?  R: Good move.  R: Just passively making territory is a sure way to lose the game. You can only play that way when you are already ahead and can afford to lose a few points.  R: The last move by your opponent was an overplay. The two squared stones can be cut, and the connection to the triangle stone is not really secure either. White was too greedy, you can punish this by cutting. White can only defend one side at a time.
R: Very good, exploit the weakness in whites formation. The mistake at move 10 comes back to haunt white now.
R: Good. Taking profit while attacking. The bottom side is pretty much destroyed, and the corner is getting bigger and bigger.
Here, I did not know how to invade White position; is this move correct?  R: What white position? White doesn't have anything here, except a weak group. So, attack! Cut! (see variation)
R: See variation.
R: White is trying to kill, but that's almost always wrong. It's risky to try to kill, because it might fail. On the other hand, not trying to kill is risky for the opponent, because he might still die ;)
R: Unneccessary. White can't push out here (see variation).
R: See variation.
R: See variation.
Here, I loose the Semeai because I didn't see the T7 move. After
R: Now white has protected the cut, and you still have no definite eyes. See variation on previous move.
R: Big mistake, white takes away his own critical liberties.
Is this move correct?  R: You got out in the open, and you can still live locally any time you want with M2, so what are you afraid of? Your group is actually quite strong now, so go find something to attack!
R: Now you're really getting paranoid. White is full of cutting points around you. Always try to run away before living. As long as white has to spend moves to keep you surrounded, the move at M10 doesn't go away. And you still have M2.
R: This is the wrong move for living locally. See variation.
R: For winning the ko, see variation. But this threat is very big, better answer it. You still have two other local ko threats that threaten life, and a few that threaten to run away to the left.
R: Empty triangle. Don't play this, except when you have already read out a sequence that works.
From here, can I esperate to survive?  R: Looks very hard now...
R: Your fuseki was pretty good, except perhaps the unnecessary move in the bottom left corner.  R: Your real problems were in the middle game. White played very greedy invasions at the top, and you failed to attack them efficiently. When white played too greedy at the left, you successfully split white into two weak groups. But then, you failed to continue with the attack and instead played an invasion. Now white could settle the situation easily by attacking the invasion.  R: Then you missed three opportunities to kill the bottom right corner. After white won the semeai, you managed to get out in the open with your weak group, and the game was close again. That's what happens when you try too hard to kill and fail, normally you shouldn't have a chance after the failed invasion ;)  R: But then you played much too defensive, while you still had the chance to attack the top. This is where you had the last chance to turn the game around. Losing the top right corner didn't really make a difference anymore.  R: So to sum up, your biggest problem seems to be weak groups. Both judging how weak a group is, and effectively attacking it. The cut at move 43 is an example of overestimating the strength of a group, while the defensive moves starting at 110 are an example of both underestimating the strength of your own group, and overestimating the white top position.  R: I would suggest doing more tsumego. This will help you better judge the strength of groups. For example, if you had seen the move at M2 (see variation at move 23), white wouldn't have been able to push you around so much. And if you had killed the bottom right corner, you wouldn't even have gotten into this situation.  R: In your games, just remember that running away is almost always better than living locally, even more so when you can simultaneously attack a neighboring group.
Hi, I play whith white in this game. I won it but i should loose it if my opponent didn't make a mistake at the end. Thanks !  RickMott:  Well, we all rely on our opponents to make at least some misteaks; otherwise it's very hard to win. :)  I've pointed out several tactical and strategic situations where I think you could have made better choices. The game-losing mistake was subtle; you gave up two stones in the bottom center which looked small, but turned out to be a 30-point difference in the score (see variations around move 76)!  The biggest improvement you can make, I think, is to  work on your reading skills.  Spend some time doing life-and-death problems, and study a couple of tesuji  books.  I can suggest "1001 Go Problems" and  "Get Strong at Tesuji", and "The Art Of Cutting and Connecting" as examples.  I like the series "The Art Of... "  because they organize the problems around a common theme.  Good luck!
RickMott: This doesn't seem like the biggest move to me at this stage of the game.   So you should not answer it.   An approach move against the lower left corner, such as F3, is much bigger.
RickMott: Still looks small.  Black has expended four stones to get maybe 8 points, and makes your corner rock solid.
RickMott: Ok, but it gives black the opportunity to make a nice extension to H3 and then a double-wing on the left side if you answer.  I'd play closer to the corner stone and try to force him to answer locally.  But this is at least in the biggest open area of the board, so it's a reasonable move.
RickMott: I wrote the last comment before I looked at this move.  I didn't cheat here. :)
RickMott: As in the upper right, this is a very small move, worth only a few points in the endgame.  A black hane here is not even sente against you.  You really must use this move to invade black's left side before he has a chance to make a giant moyo.  Black should ignore you and play on the left.
RickMott: Which he does, but too tight to the corner.  You should probably invade on the left at C11 or so, then run out into the center.
RickMott: This is probably too tight.  If you want to defend the bottom, consider the 3-3 point (R3).  It would be very hard for black to play around N3 and live.  He could reduce you at N4, but you could make profit chasing him.  I still think a play on the left is bigger, though.  You could either invade at C11 or reduce at D10.  Both would be huge.
RickMott: Black got there first.   Bummer.
RickMott: This move leaves a lot of open space in the corner for Black to work with.  If you're going to defend this territory, I would consider a move like R4 instead and dare Black to try an invasion.  He can reduce you, but you should be able to reduce his moyo while attacking the invading/reducing stone.
RickMott: I think this is to small scale.  The way the game is developing, Black should probably take tengen (center point) now.
I was thinking that it was maybe the time for black to go to the san-san, but I think that this move is bad...  RickMott: Not bad, but it leaves black with sente.  I think it is worth less than the center point.
... and when he played this move, I was afraid. He take a lot of territory, and I don't really know the way to counter his influence.  RickMott: Yes, you are behind now.  Think how different this would look if the center stone were yours. :  You can consider an invasion in the lower left corner, or start reducing the black moyo and expanding yours in the center.  I think a good way to start would be H5, for example.  But you have many possibilities: K8, J7 look reasonable too.  I think this is the right area to start in, though.  Your broad plan must be to restrain black's moyo while building your own in the lower right.
RickMott: Right idea (reduce moyo), but   I think you are not as strong here as you would be on the bottom.  You are too far inside black's sphere of influence.  He should jump out from O16 and try to surround you on a large scale.
RickMott: But he chooses to try defending his territory, which is good for you.
RickMott: Hmm.  I think something like J12 might be better.  You strengthen your stone locally and separate H13 from K10, threatening either to cut off K10 or break further into the moyo.  This defensive move doesn't look like it makes a big moyo of your own, and lets his shore up the gap between K10 and H13.
RickMott: Wow, both players get wild and crazy. ;)
RickMott: Why here?  It doesn't help your stone in danger.  Better options would be (1) L12, to break through the gap between M13 and K10 and run back toward your stones, or (b) M14, to fight locally.   See variations.
RickMott: Pushing first at M16 is sente.  Black must respond or you get the four-stone group around O17.   It's always a good idea to create cutting points if you can do so in sente.
RickMott: This connection is bad for Black.  he should give up the stones and strengthen the connection between K10 and H13.  Probably J12 is good.
RickMott: Good luck for you!  Black should not have played out this sequence.  Now you have 16 points in captured stones plus a wall.  This turned the game around for you.  Bad mistake by black.
RickMott:  He can wiggle on the hook, but it won't help.
RickMott: No, you don't have to answer yet.  Much better to break through the gap by playing J12 or J13.  You can take these stones anytime; wait until you are forced to do so.
RickMott: Good move.
RickMott: This leads to a very complicated fight.   I'd be more inclined to extend up with H7 first.  It can't be cut off, and you can threaten either to break way into the moyo or cut off K6 which I think is an overplay.
RickMott: You come out ahead in the fight, and are now in the lead.
RickMott: No, I think you have to save the two stones with a hane at M9; they're important cutting stones worth at least  30 points.  See variations.  You can keep much more of the bottom moyo this way, and I think you maintain a clear lead.
RickMott: Ouch.  This capture is a 30+ point loss for you, and Black is ahead.
RickMott: Way too small to answer.  This is a tiny endgame move, maybe 1-1/2 points.  Much bigger, for example to atari at E7.
RickMott: Well, OK, you get it anyway. :)
RickMott: Excellent!  This is now the biggest area.  You must use these stones to reduce black's moyo.
RickMott: You are lucky here.  Black could have just pushed through at J12 and captured your stone.
RickMott: Sente, good move.
RickMott: Good, this is big.
RickMott: Black doesn't know how to respond.  This move doesn't seem necessary to me; I don't see how you can invade here and live (but maybe that's why I'm only 4k AGA :).  Black should play F2, forcing you to back up at G1.
RickMott: I think you can do better by jumping to D1.  Black will have to yield several more points that way, and I think you end with sente.
RickMott: Black missed a 4-point capture here.  If he ataris at J12, you cannot connect
RickMott: but once black forces you to capture...
RickMott: Now the 4-point opportunity is gone.  The game is simplifying now, and black is clearly ahead.  I'll be very interested to see how you managed to win from here.
RickMott: Sets up the threat of double atari.  The diagonal play of L5 is one point better, though.  Black can't cut you off or you still get the double atari.
RickMott: Oops.  Now I see how you won.  Black should just descend here at M18.
RickMott: No, no, double atari at N17!  Huge move, might put you back in the game.
RickMott: But black misses it, so...
RickMott: You get 12 points, and now you've picked up enough to win  Game over.
RickMott: the hane at D1 is worth several points in sente, you should take it first.
RickMott: Why here?  J12 is worth a point.
RickMott: Unnecessary.
wornof: This seemed reasonable to me, corners are good! Would it be better to put some pressure on white, though?  *** No, taking the corner is never wrong. If White had played on the 3-4 point, an approach here would be worth considering, but the 4-4 point is hard to attack.
wornof [14k]: Hi  wornof:I was aiming to take some territory in the corner, though he was too canny to let me get as much as I'd have liked. Also puts pressure on him, but should I not touch a weak stone?  *** Yes, better not touch a weak stone. I do not like this joseki too much, because it settles the groups very early. White can be happy about this, as it balances well with his corner stone on Q4. If you are afraid to play a pincer against a stronger player, just play O17 or O16 which assures you the corner and leaves some potential for attacking white on the right side.
*** This is not joseki (see variation)
wornof: Here he jumps in.  *** sure, because he knows that you missed this in the joseki. P15 is slow and too far from the edge.  The exchange S14-S13-S15-R12 gives White thickness and influence, where black gains only little.
wornof: I defend to try and put pressure on and take as much territory as I can, but again this doesnt look stable.  *** Again: the contact strengthens the weak white stone. Why not play one further to the right (P17)?
*** this is fine.
*** I would have played R6 here. R8 is too close the upper right wall and to far from the corner stone.
*** looks a little bit timid. C10 is usual, because it works better together with the corner stone (D4). C11 is too far away.
wornof: Same as before, for lack of any better ideas.  *** I understand this. However here a pincer would be nice. See variation.
*** you should really follow the joseki here. Especially in handicap games, it is white who wants to deviate from the joseki, because the joseki gives a fair result for both parties. This way white cannot win.
****obviuosly black likes the result on the top right corner. I do not. E5 is just like P15. It does not attack nor does it make territory.
*** now C5 is okay.
*** this looks like a big mistake to me. There are many better ways to repsond to this, see variation.
*** Yes, mandatory
**** this move is questionable. White answer is obvious. Is the exchange favourable for black? I do not think so.
wornof: I'd broken into the centre there, but was wary of doing nothing more than helping him down here. Was invasion right, and was this the right place?  **** The place looks ok for me, however the timing is not perfect: black should not strengthen the white wall (G5, H6) just before he invades.
**** I think here black must invade on the 3-3 point.
**** when invading, light play is important. It is better here to attack the single white stone instead of protecting the Black stones which are an easy target for white.
wornof: I decided to ignore this for now, since the other group looked more important.  Here, it can already be seen that he has strongly taken territory in J3 area and along the right. Is this just something to accept or what? I didnt seem to have anything in return for this.  **** It is the right decision to give up this stone. But it hurts.  J3 etc. is almost certain territory. You can only invade when you have support from the top. The right side is still fairly open. Black must stabilize its invading group and then he can launch an attack on R10, R6 and so on.
*** fine
*** horrible. What is your intention here?
*** I think this is overplay. Blacks group is still far from being alive.
**** this is to protect the cut at H7. But I do not think this is urgent.
**** It is a pitty, because now the chances to get into the right side vanish.
**** too passive from white.
*** This move is like F5. It helps white. Black earns nothing with it.  You should not worry too much about White's prospective territory. If you enlarge the upper left, you will have enough to decide the game in your favour.
**** This is slow and clumsy. Almost every other move is better.
**** with P2 black could have started a Ko fight, which is worth considering.
wornof: Reasonably big move, I think. Should I have been doing that earlier?  ***** yes, e.g. instead of O14. Black would then have played H17.
**** This is not in the right spirit. Again: do not defend every single point. White settles too easily. When you cannot attack white, it is impossible to gain profit.
**** Try to avoid this kind of moves (=P15, =E5).
wornof: I decided that this was working for me, so let it go, banking on invading the centre from one of my other groups   **** Yes, this gave you a good amount of safe territory.
**** I guess that was not the best black could do.
wornof: Here, the centre looks like big points, so I invaded. But should I have? Looking at things again, we both had access to the centre and a move at R10 (very maybe, I dont really know what would happen there!) or maybe K6 could be good.  *** I do not see that K6 is going to work.  R10 needs preparation. O13 may look slow, but must be answered locally.  H15? I am interested to see what will happen...
wornof: Running, always running...
wornof: I make my second eye, but he was driving me, and there's some white-looking territory at P10. Could I have managed that better?
wornof: And here, J9 or H10 look just as good for taking that point, but also invading. Was I too conservative?  **** you were extremely lucky that your group became alive. It was important to make life sure here. H10 would have done it in a slightly more effective way. J9 is not as good, because white will atari. So white gets an extra stone to play here.
wornof: I make a mistake...
wornof: But he doesnt notice, luckily for me. This exchange might have gone better if I connected the L18 group? I'd probably not have captured O16, but would have been in his territory   **** You were really lucky.
*** This is too small. White should not answer here.
**** ?????
wornof: Looking back at things, this looks like the bigger move. He solidifies a lot of territory there. Am I right?  *** the other move was everything but big, it was superfluous, a wasted move. If you see yourself making an empty triangle, look again and ask yourself if this is really a good move. Almost never an ampty triangle is a good move.
*** White says: "Thank you, I wanted to play here anyway."
**** empty triangle. Need I to say more?
**** you like empty triangles. Here it is at least worth something.
**** Now this is endgame. Here it is important to keep the intitative. A4 is worth a lot, but unfortunately it is gote for black.
wornof: Luckily he defended the B9 point, but I'm not sure this counts as an attack! I immediately thought it was a mistake, yes? B12 nasty?  **** Again, you were lucky.
**** D10 is 1 point better.
wornof: Foolishly, I was on automatic. This was unnecessary?  **** indeed, it was. Minus 1 Point.
**** this was a neutral point.
*** this too.
I realize that playing ogeima, for both corners isn't normally a good idea, but considering the fuseki I though I'd take a stab at it.  Ideas on the situation would be appreciated.  There's nothing bad about this move. A would be better, to put more pressure on the white stone. The corner is not well protected here anyways, so you should play A without hesitation.
I think this exchange is good for White. Instead... (see variation)
This is not bad but R6 seems better.
Thought this move would be acceptable, I'm a bit paranoid of my corners, if you could show some other possible moves.  This is exactly why I didn't like the tsuke of E17.
Very smart! R6 is also possible, perhaps a bit better, but also certainly more complicated.
I don't understand the meaning behind this move. It seems like you're trying to confine White's stones, but it's too loose of a move. I think A would be better.
As you get stronger, you feel that your stones have to do more - be farther apart. However, by playing like this, you give White enough aji to exploit that moves like this are not worth it. Plus, the marked stones are in a bad position. A tighter move like A would be much better (capturing White's cutting stones is very important, but more aji than required isn't good).
This seems bad for Black.
"Never touch weak stones." White J4 gives White good shape.
Is this the best extension? I wasn't sure but it didn't look to bad so I played it.  Sure, this move gives you territory, but it has no offensive reason behind it. It's not unreasonable to assume that even if White plays a reducation move ariund here, Black will get the marked territory, so this move only secure maybe 10 points in gote. Instead, turning at A to try to seperate white's two groups might be better.  As Takemiya Masaki said, "The player with the most territory doesn't win. The player with the most territory at the end of the game wins."
Later when I reviewed this I realized that this move was unneeded, horrible gote too :(  I haven't read through every position, but I think I remember lecture where someone said this was a ko wthout a stone at B2. I included a variation, which I believe proves this is so.
These moves seem big, but in reality, they're worth values only in the single digits. For instance, a black probe black R3 is probably bigger than this. Or fighting with L14 is also possible. I will stop commenting here.
No idea what was going throw my mind here, time pressure got to me I guess.
Heres the lucky big misread.
Heres the even bigger misread.
And that's the game, fairly short, thank you for taking the time to review it is much appreciated.  It's no problem. I have fun reviewing games.  For a overview of the game, you seem fairly strong in the opening, but seem to have trouble in the middlegame. To improve, just remember that even a defensive move must have offensive qualities to be good. Pure gote moves are never good.  If you have any questions, please feel free to email me.
Furabio [21k?]: you should play on smaller boards (so should I)  David : I think that you ar right, you should try on smaller board to feel the "way of go". This game is a big fight, but you have never thinked about territory during the game. But it's normal, it's not easy :)
What is the aim of this move ? There are more urgent and usefull moves. See variations.
This move is too weak. Stones have to be connected, otherwise they die. See the example of variation.
A bit slow. A and B stones are already connected, there is no threat there, so black can play somewhere else.
There are more urgent moves.Black have weak stones (marked with a circle, see variation too). There are still some important hole on the goban, like the upper side. Black can play for example on O17 (triangle)
White should attack.
Bad move. The stone is not connected and could not be easily connected.
So, black could kill white as shown on the previous move.
Furabio [21k?]: you didn't punish my hueg mistake
Good move. White should try to live and is not so far to have his eyes (don't forget that you are not alive until you have two eyes). And black is now in trouble.
Black stones are weak. Black should build his territory, and be stronger. Otherwhise he can be punished.
As seen before, white has better moves
masahiro [?]: yes.www masahiro [?]: I'm liek omg.w
Now black should take car of the invasion, and swecure his territory
masahiro [?]: I suck.w  Now black is very weak.  So the important point : look if your stones are connected, and look at the liberties they have. Ever and ever.
Furabio [21k?]: remember, you have to lose your 100 games as fast as possible.w masahiro [?]: wwwwwww haihai.w
masahiro [?]: 13ko torimodose.w
The ladder is losed.  See http://senseis.xmp.net/?Ladder
So, look at the black stones now. They are not connected themselves. How could they live ? It is impossible, and that's why white is so strong. Maybe you think that black can connect. But it's wrong, he is cut everywhere. See varations
A mistake, now black can live here.
Furabio [21k?]: this huge fight is becoming interesting. Furabio [21k?]: i'm enjoying it.  So, how we are ? Black stones marked are not still alive (F8 is urgent).  A lot of white stones are weak but can be easily connected.
masahiro [?]: ^^ My 19 soldiers.w
Furabio [21k?]: atari. an expendable stone.
masahiro [?]: I'm thinking small.w
masahiro [?]: look at our three stones upstairs.w masahiro [?]: they are peaceful.w
Furabio [21k?]: zen garden
I can't see what is the aim of your moves. Both of you should try to make points with territory. You should not only think about capturing the enemy. Try h=just one time and you wille see, you wille make a lot of points.
masahiro [?]: I'll stab your eyes.w
Furabio [21k?]: ^^
masahiro [?]: I CANT SEEEE!w Furabio [21k?]: kono itte no subete wo.www
Furabio [21k?]: this game is being a huge fight, which is not so common on a 19x19
masahiro [?]: ^^
marked stones are very weak. See variation.
Furabio [21k?]: ko threat.w masahiro [?]: w
Furabio [21k?]: ko ^0^
masahiro [?]: kodomo.w
White is taking territory (=points), black should do something
masahiro [?]: my 22 turns.w Furabio [21k?]: wwwww
masahiro [?]: just pass :3
Furabio [21k?]: ko ^0^
masahiro [?]: my 12 turns.www Furabio [21k?]: wwwwww
masahiro [?]: How come d'oh!
masahiro [?]: cô
masahiro [?]: there gota be a way XD Furabio [21k?]: there's no way.
Here, the game is over
Now the game is over.
masahiro [?]: köpek.www
masahiro [?]: I'm so fool.w Furabio [21k?]: what was that.w
masahiro [?]: meand dog.w masahiro [?]: means*w
Furabio [21k?]: my mistake.w masahiro [?]: it's my mistake.w
Furabio [21k?]: ii desu.w masahiro [?]: my 29 turns.w
waya300 [11k]: ??????????????????????????????????
Furabio [21k?]: phone masahiro [?]: ^^ Furabio [21k?]: back
The upper right corner is not closed. White should close it. Otherwhise, black can go there and make two eyes (dont' forget the eyes :) )
Black should try to live, and make an eye
Furabio [21k?]: do you intend to lose on time?
masahiro [?]: no!w
masahiro [?]: just spaced out.w
Furabio [21k?]: thinking too much will lead you to commit mistakes, anyway. there must be a balance between thinking and blitzing.
masahiro [?]: das is ein krieg!
Furabio [21k?]: waya happens to be german.w masahiro [?]: What's waya.w Furabio [21k?]: the spectator up there.
masahiro [?]: Oh! OMG DIDN'T SEEw
waya300 [11k]: i play now sry
Furabio [21k?]: do you think you can live there?
masahiro [?]: of course.w
Bad move, useless because white is very strong at the lower left corner. White should play on the upper right corner
Furabio [21k?]: you have 2:34 minutes
masahiro [?]: I'm living there for 2 morew mınsçw
masahiro [?]: AAAYCHW1
Furabio [21k?]: too much thinking time for obvious mistakes.
Furabio [21k?]: dead.
masahiro [?]: I don't think I can win this. Furabio [21k?]: misclicked Furabio [21k?]: bah
Furabio [21k?]: damn new mouse ^0^ masahiro [?]: ^0^
Furabio [21k?]: my obvious mistake, this time masahiro [?]: omg^^
Furabio [21k?]: shi-
masahiro [?]: you have a huuuuge territory.w Furabio [21k?]: I'VE COMMITED UNSPEAKABLE MISTAKES Furabio [21k?]: byonyomi is going to kick in Furabio [21k?]: w
Furabio [21k?]: now you have to play fast
masahiro [?]: what is that (5)
Furabio [21k?]: the numer of byonyomi you have Furabio [21k?]: 30 sec each
Furabio [21k?]: just having fun ^0^ masahiro [?]: ^0^
blas [4k]: hi
bajie88 [2k?]: hi I think is dificult for him to link his stones. With that move I hope to be able to attack d13
I try to make a base and later attack d13
Not a good move: White wants to strengthen his 2 space extension but in fact he is helping Black.  -- jantje --
I think this is a vital point  Pincering is the right idea. Finding the precise spot, however, is quite difficult. In my opinion A, B and C could be slightly better than your move: A, because it makes an immediate connection possible, and B and C for two reasons: 1) they are further away from D13 which means that you will have more freedom in the upper part of the fight (when D13 starts walking a stone at D10 or D9 is less of a concern than a stone at D11), and 2) they put more pressure on C6. I'd play D10 myself. -- jantje --
Not good! You are repaying the favor W did to you when he played E16, and with interest! Please don't just take my word for it, but study yourself how much this strengthens White and how little it helps Black.  -- jantje --
I have the impression that saomething go wrong. I know is bad to chase from behind and is bad too to let him cap with h15, but if I scape, d11 is in problems  It is interesting that you start complaining right after your first dubious move. You are the only person who knows whether your mistake caused your pessimism or the other way around :) -- jantje --
I think is the best. later I'll play j17  Assuming that your opponent falls asleep, that is... Always expect that your opponent will play the best move.  -- jantje --
I try to make a base and attack the two stones. But I see that the F16 group is not alive and I think I'll have problems in the future. I feel I´ve not played well in a handi game  Good move and played for a good reason. You lost some ground on the top but nothing serious has happened yet. -- jantje --
D4 will live but this group can have problems. Better to take care of him  Another good move. There is no development of your upper group towards the right because of the marked stone, therefore it must go to the centre. And you are attacking White! Your last two moves have the kind of flow that one should strive for: first C8 strengthens D11, then G12 makes use of that strength to attack. -- jantje --
reinforcing this grup and threating f12  OK -- jantje --
I didnt see this move
White's last move may have been a surprise to you, but what on earth possessed you to play this spiritless move? The fight is on now, and you cannot walk away from it. In Go, keeping up your will to fight (kiai) is almost more important than having a good position.  In the variations I am exploring some lines how the fight could have continued, just to give you an idea. -- jantje --
Please take a moment to consider what you've done: the White group that you wanted to attack now has made a ponnuki in the centre of the board. In this position the proverb "the ponnuki is worth 30 points" is not an exaggeration. -- jantje --
Is better to reinforce the other two groups? I think now they have no big problems an I have to make territory. Anyway Im attacking c6, and that will help d11  This move is excellent, but for now Black can forget about attacking since White has become too strong. -- jantje --
In normal circumstances this would be an overplay, but here White can risk it because of the ponnuki. -- jantje --
The important thing is to keep W separated. -- jantje --
A is probably better, because the W stones in the centre will start to coordinate well now.
In White's position I would have connected at A, emphasizing the centre. -- jantje --
Making sure the life
Somewhat impudent but it seems possible! -- jantje --
Making sure the life  Why not A first? -- jantje --
You should not have let White connect so easily. -- jantje --
Now I have to make sure this group live
I have to make territory too. I aim L18  By now you have probably lost your 2H advantage. But the game is not hopeless yet! I thinks your last move is OK, since chasing your upper left group should not give W much here. -- jantje --
That is not a good idea because you are banging your head against White's marked stone. -- jantje --
This is too defensive, I believe. If you had played, for example, at A, I don't think White could have cut. See variation. -- jantje --
I see the problem of his wall but I dont know what to do. Maybe o17 was no good. Maybe was better to attack the left white group, but is very big  Attacking the White group is slowly becoming possible, as you say. But this is only because of White's last few moves.  Note how White is slowly "spending" the strength of his ponnuki: during the last few moves he has forced the Black top group to bend around, building the wall you speak of. This was possible because the White left side group is so strong, but it is less strong now than before.  I draw attention to this because it is the normal way of things in Go: to make use of a strong group you push your enemy's groups against it, but this reduces the strength! -- jantje --
Great move! Suddenly White has to take care of his left side group that was so strong before. -- jantje --
I think White should have played at A instead. If you had played B now it might have been hard to answer. This remains possible for the next few moves. -- jantje --
Not good, strengthening White. A is better. -- jantje --
Too defensive. A is a better move for Black.
All the time the vital point at A is unplayed!
Now White is safe and should have a won game. -- jantje --
Is this move sente? I don't think so! See variation. -- jantje --
As explained I believe this is unnecessary and therefore bad (it is not as if Black has time for unnecessary moves here!). If you are convinced White's last move is sente, then you must at least force with A first.  The idea of that is that White will certainly answer A to keep up his threat against the corner, later he has more freedom whether or not to answer A when it comes. -- jantje --
I was afraid of this move, but I didnt see the moment to avoid this, because my center group was in danger.  There were two opportunities for you: to play at A at the right moment, and to avoid defending unnecessarily at B. -- jantje --
This move and A are miai. -- jantje --
Here White's peep is excellent! (compare E16 in the beginning of the game) -- jantje --
This is bad  yes :( -- jantje --
Now I attack  There should be no attack here, but White is going to help you. -- jantje --
Maybe A is slightly better, but this should also be OK for White. -- jantje -
White is really flirting with disaster now! But he probably had missed the clever cutting sequence that Black is now springing on him. -- jantje --
I didnt see that this move makes g12 an eye. the rest is stupid  Well, not quite :) -- jantje --
Now A for Black threatens to kill either directly or by ko. It is a pity a) that you did not see it and b) that you wasted some ko threats on the previous moves. -- jantje --
blas [4k]: thx bajie88 [1d?]: thx  The position is not really played out! (see variation)  In this final position I have marked what I believe to be your worst moves of this game; and another 'worst move' is the move you did not play at H9 during a few moves, when this would have been a sharp attack on White.  Is there a common denominator to your mistakes? Perhaps that your were too timid to take control of the game, which in turn might have to do with the psychology of a handicap game.   Anyway, don't feel bad about your mistakes and remember that the reviewer has the advantage of hindsight.  Hope you enjoy the review as much as I enjoyed the reviewing! -- jantje --
Aargh! Please consider by yourself how this ko fight would have turned out. (I think it would make White sweat but might not be enough for a Black win) -- jantje --
here you choose the wrong way
Ihmenjo [16k]: a very well played game!
Yaxamie [11k]: thanks Mewto [11k]: thx Ihmenjo [16k]: wow Ihmenjo [16k]: that was close Ihmenjo [16k]: if Yax has been able to contain and fight  for that upper central, I think he might have been able to  turn this around and squeak by with a win Mewto [11k]: right Ihmenjo [16k]: also, I'm reviewing Ihmenjo [16k]: would you mind giving me control? Yaxamie [11k]: hi
Personally I don't prefer this move, and as you probably know 'A' is definately more common, and 'B' for more moyo preferable players. C is also nice with J4 being so short.
In this formation O15 is better than R17?  Well, there are alot of possibilities, most commonly are marked. I think O15 is fine.  (you can check variations and set your preference yourself :)
A is still possible.
I think this is satisfactory for both
now can I tenuki or L17 is vital? Is tengen big?  For me it's hard to tell. I think 'A' is the move I'd prefer, however the timing of L17 is hard, so it may hurt you in the long run to avoid it.  As for tengen, I think it's too early, and some territory still needs to be settled.
I think this is too hasty. (variation)
This is an overplay. A is correct, it give a much easier fight.
which moves for white is good here?  The truth is, no matter what, this is going to be hard for white.  As you point out yourself though, A is good :)
Locally this is good, but I hope your juedgement told you that this game was going bad :)
This is overprotective, don't worry too much about your tengen stone in this scenario.
I can't decide which move would be good here. L12 looks ugly. May be simple L11?  In the last few moves 'A' has been a very urgent point, and by fighting in the middle, all white has achieved is making black stronger.  It does seem ridicolous to let black H10, but continuing the middle fight is simply just wrong focus.  Okey, I've looked through your variations, and if your concerned with your middle group securing it with r18 rather than this. It may sound harsh, but, right now the marked stones have achieved absolutely nothing, so white is terribly behind.
This move is terrible :)
Seems like I need move like G17 - or not?  You do, it's good :)
Is O3 best point to invade now?  Yes.
Wrong Direction. (Var.)
Consider A?
territory behind P4-N5 really big - but I can't suggest any better  Look at Move 54 :)
Is D2 now good?  Sure, I prefer D2.   Btw, kudos on E10, good job!
G4 is more reasonable.
seems like black 73 is slightly inadequte - but how to react? Seems like to early to G3.
I don't like this exchange for white. It's too dangerous and complicated for my taste :)
Seems like I deal bad with C8. Is C8 too deep?  C8 Is fine. Black almost threw away his last chance... (Variation)
I can't read from here
This seems rather suicidal.  Black A seems very intimidating.  I also think trying to kill the big B2 group is...  a little farfetched.  And last of all, B5 is better shape for living :)
!!!!  Next time, A please.
This is sloppy too, b8 looks, A is more fighting spirit.
Seems like here invasion is possible - but where?  No, this is desperate thinking. However, the reduction possibilities are terrific.
Are white really alive here?
Can now black block this walk?
Maybe (variation)
Wow....
In this game, you set yourself in bad situations whenever you started a fight.   You need to develop your fighting skills, and your judgment skills, because mostly your moves generally made sense.   You played more stable than your opponent, as he made some terrible blunders, where as you generally just made small mistake in direction and judgement.  Work on it! And feel free to ask any questions at lasse@tengen.dk
at this stage invading the lower right corner seems very risky for black :  you can notice that the extension of R4 with P3 is a very solid move. (even without talking about N3 and K3)   I think at most black could prevent white from making  more secure territory too easily on the right side of the board by playing toward  Q7. But it would certainly lead to a difficult fight for black when he doesn't need it taking into account the global situation on the board. (difficult because of white Q10)    let's notice that this invasion that i told you about (right side) will become almost impossible  later in the game .....
.... as i told you before Black66 starts a sequence of moves which makes completely secure the right side for White. Actually the sequence goes until Black86 when on the top of it black loses sente after making more  secure white moyo.  The problem here is also that  black doesn't gain much with this sequence whereas white is in heaven.
actually even if you stop the sequence here white is already well protected.
now white's wall is just unbreakable and it goes to the center ....
... but too slowly i think        ok so,  as you asked it my commentary was about the lower right corner and the possibility to invade it or not.   As you can see my answer was negative.  My advice for you would be to think more about strategy than invasion. You' ve played a good game relatively to your level but you have to keep in mind that your opponent made some big mistakes (White65 is a good example of it since it is completely unsignificant) and that's the reason why you won by more than 20 points. You also have to stop playing moves like Black88 or black110 because they are too slow.
kaktus [5k]: hi kaktus [5k]: hf
Imagist: Good, this is necessary to prevent black from building too large a moyo.
Imagist: This is okay, but the triangled points are equivalent, so it isn't urgent for either player to play in this area.  It's probably better to play one of the other big points on the board and play on the left when one move has a clearer advantage over the other.
Is this move all right?  or maybe better b4? or e10?  Imagist: I can't say for sure that this is bad, but I personally would prefer B4 (see variation).
this looks a little agressive...  Imagist: White has a weak point at A, and by attaching here, black is fixing white's weakness.  Generally it's best to avoid attaching to weak stones.  Locally, black could attack with any of the triangled points or even by playing A directly, but the best choice would depend on the full board position.  Since the position isn't clear, I would say that it is best to tenuki.  My choice in this case would be B.
how was my reaction?  Imagist: This is good I think.  It leaves a slight weakness at A, but a good followup at one of the marked points, as well as good eyeshape, so I think white is doing fine here.
Imagist: This approach is generally used when black has a strong position around A, and wants to build a moyo.  Other than this it generally isn't very good because it doesn't threaten the corner very severely.
should I better respond to q6?  Imagist: This is probably okay, but it can get complicated if black tries to fight for sente in order to move first on the bottom right.  A takes clearer advantage of black's high approach (see variation).
i was not really satified with this outcome...looks like a huge weakness around L4.  Imagist: Black should protect the marked stone after this, though, so white can protect at A.
Imagist: Better to force from the other side at B5, since black already spent 5 moves protecting the corner.
Imagist: Good, A would be too docile.
Imagist: Can't do this, black's corner stones are in danger.  See variation.
Imagist: Good, now black's 5 stones are under attack.
Imagist: Connecting at A is better - make profit and take away forcing moves at the same time.
Imagist: Black can't make enough eyespace to live here, so what's the point.  Better to get out of danger and capture a stone at A.
Imagist: A still better.
now it is stronger - but what do you think about the left side?  Imagist: This still leaves black A, a forcing move that might be useful for getting eyespace later.  The left is okay.  The five triangled stones are overconcentrated and white has a big sente endgame move with B for later.
Imagist: White can still split with A - better to get out by jumping at B.
seems like a good timing  Imagist: Fine with me. :)
still wanted to protect... necessary?  Imagist: I think it would be better to protect the corner and remove black's eyespace at A.  Black is too weak locally to take advantage of white's weak spot.
Imagist: Here white A would be nice, wouldn't it!
Imagist: This isn't much good - it doesn't threaten the corner very much and it can't escape very easily.  A or B would be better.
Imagist: This leaves black with forcing moves (see variation).
i was happy with it until here! justified? ^^  Imagist: White is still ahead, but could take better advantage of black's marked play.
Imagist: This is bad for two reasons.  First, it strengthens black, making the threat of black A more real.  Second, the hane at B is urgent (huge!).
Imagist: !!!
Imagist: Better to attack black on the side, and just let this stone die on its own.
blacks play seemed again too aggressive to me...  Imagist: The triangled stone is definitely too aggressive, but the two hanes are good shape.
Imagist: Still very big.
whi felt like a big mistake. i should have attaked the lowe group in order to solidify my weks middle group...  Imagist: I agree.
Imagist: White is solid here: put more pressure with the hane at A.
saved - and white has to watch out now  Imagist: Yes.
Imagist: This loses initiative - better to attach at A I think (my reading may not be perfect here).
black totally took over initiative - and white managed to place another weak stone on g17. this one only brouht trouble. turned the game  Imagist: Black isn't quite strong enough on the right to pull this off, but he does have a lot of thickness.  Still, I would try A instead.
black ignores to oftern, so white can attack again
Imagist: Huge overplay.
Imagist: Don't respond just because black played on this side.  The hane at A leaves black without enough eyespace.
now i have to go on the other weak black goup. how to attack best?  Imagist: When trying to surround a group, moves farther away from the group are better.  Here, A would work much better.
really messed up here
bad tenuki?  Imagist: No, black is ahead, so there's no reason to risk being cut off here.
now white can connect and reduce succesfully
Imagist: Better at A.
Imagist: Better at A.
great by black!
any advices on the following endgame?  Imagist: A strategic pointer - the endgame has already been playing for a while now!
Imagist: This is no good, as you can see.
Imagist: White is okay to play A7 (see variation).
Imagist: Necessary?  You can probably read this out yourselves :).
----------- This is great. I like that you chose the more aggressive approach. Pins down white's side acting like a cap, and aims to take over the board in a big way. It's a shame white's side got away like it did.
----------- Any of these points is a fine place to pincer. O16 is steady but feels out of tune with your overall setup. Keep in mind that any 3-4 stone is begging for an enclosure or stone to pincer. Going there now is both an enclosure -and- a pincer, which puts great pressure on white; who now has to escape while figuring out a way to keep you from extending or sealing that area further.
MaTo: I propably should have left the corner without a closure for now and play on the left side or made a pincer around r10 or r10?  ----------- Definitely now if not earlier. With the O16 stone in place, a pincer is even more devastating, slamming white against a more fortified spot and slightly reducing his chances in the corner.
MaTo: At least at this time is hould have played instead on the left side c10 or d10 or if i wanted to give a bit of pressure for that stone i should've played r10  ----------- Right. This is the wrong direction. Last chance for a pincer. If you really want to play here, try for R16, R15 is not as solid and only encourages white to reinforce, as well as leaving an invasion in the corner still.
MaTo: and again at this point i should've played on the left side  ----------- Left side is indeed bigger. But this is not only bad timing, but the wrong direction. These stones are all really cramped and not adding much to each others' power. If you must play here now, go to S14 and undercut white's eye space and even out the balance in this corner.
----------- This and R13 are small, it's your chance to move against the left side or on the bottom. White can't gain much here compared to what can be gained by filling out the rest of the board.
MaTo:  and now i lost the chance
MaTo: Maybe i should have done a bit smaller of an extension because of the white strong position on the right side since the invasion is almost too easy.  ----------- Maybe tack this one a line lower. Remember that it's good to build box-like frameworks. Pulling back though allows white a good second extension along the side, though, so it's a tradeoff for the invasion.
MaTo: At this point i was aimint at and invasion of d7 but it got sealed right before i could do it.  ----------- Instead of this it may be a good idea to invade the left outright. It's only natural for white to respond to this by filling in his last gap, but your group has room to run and can probably get an eye on the bottom side at the moment. It's a balancing act, but it becomes incredibly hard to invade after wD7.
MaTo: Propably a mistake as the white wall resulting from this gave too good chances for developing to the center
----------- This works to live, but in this situation, B3 is much better because it is sente due to the impact it can have on white's left side while still creating a living shape.
----------- Too small, be careful of moves like this. It's worth only two points and doesn't change the living status of your group.
MaTo: propably should have rather played around p12 to push down on the white stones a bit and get some territory from the center
MaTo: These moves were far too small at this time  ----------- Definitely. E17, D13, P12, S6, all very good points.
MaTo: Here i should have rather played around p12 i believe
MaTo: I let white make a far too big territorial framework i think i was wanting to connect my two groups since my lower group was pretty weak
MaTo: Maybe i should have connected at j7 but i dont think that it has a very big effect  ----------- Connecting doesn't make any territory, but the following sequence ends with black just throwing away stones.  Not good if you don't have a plan or reason for doing so. You don't gain anything from connecting, but white gets a few free points while you throw stones at him.
----------- There is a better combination here starting here at S6.
----------- Careful about moves like these and make sure you have the followup read out, in this case white can trap you.
MaTo: this move pretty much accomplished all that i wanted to do with it
MaTo: The reason that the game became pretty close is that IonutTabac didnt realize that the 212-213 exchange made his corner group killable
MaTo: Didnt want to fight him over one point since i had already counted our points and seen that i had already lost unless i got some big points from somewhere
MaTo: Didnt notice this one
budongni [3k]: hio
GFree [3k]: hi :)
Only 2 games on gobase.org go this route, so I suspect that this move is suboptimal  MR: I think that both, R14 and a Kakari in the lower right corner, are fine. Most players wouldn't like to allow a black shimari in the lower right corner and therefore start with a kakari there.
neither of them respond this way. It looks weird to me but I can't figure out how to take advantage of it.  MR: The result that you get on the right side is fine - white gets a totally stable position within black's sphere of influence. However, black does not need to answer S18 with R17, so S18 gives black another chance to play a pincer at R12 or R13.
I felt it would be too good for black if black plays in this area  MR: Yes, playing on the lower edge feels totally normal for white. Variations tend to be very different depending on whether you choose K3 of L3.
I wasn't sure about this move. It seems too defensive, but everything else on the board looks defenseive to me as well. I considred n4 too here, but it seemed I had an answer to black's play in that area that at least helped me a bit, but black d18 followed by c12 was multiple sente for black. This is a position I found very difficult to evaluate  MR: D18 looks perfectly normal to me, as it secures the white corner group. Next largest move seems to be N3.
MR: The first very strange move. C17 or E17 are normal.
MR: Not important. I would switch to N3 at the bottom.
MR: Good move for black.
MR: My feeling is that O14 is only good if you can continue with the double hane.
I didn't like the way this strengthened black, but felt that it was important to get some control of the center... when I feel like I'm not quite sure how to handle the position, I tend to start a fight and see if I can handle that :)  MR: Strange methodology ... If you want to switch to R7, better do not exchange O/N14 against O/N15. If you want to start a fight, better play the double hane or invade the upper side directly.
This was an invitation to invade... making may wall useful...
MR: There is no necessity for black to invade here.
Reduce, and create a potential exit for my stones before attacking  MR: White should keep jumping to separate the black stones. After that, white can play more severe moves against the black lower right formation, e.g. starting with O3 or Q2. White O4 just asks black to stabilize himself.
I considered A, but decided it was too thin  MR: A is too thin, L7 is an alternative.
MR: ?
I felt that this ilted things back towords me I doubt I could have killed black, but I have control of the center now, and black is going to have to live small or remain weak.  MR: The white shape is not made to "take control of the center" but has many weaknesses.
now my two groups are connected, and black is still in trouble
access to the side *and* invade woo hoo
this made no sense, thanks for the stone
this is the price of S6... but it's not so bad since black either quits early or takes gote.
I probably should have played this instead of s6?  MR: You cannot get everything!
I missed the cut. doh
k15 might have been stronger for black?  MR: Not allowing to be cut aart would have been stronger ;-)
MR: Black should not play this move if it does not work ...
MR: This is *not* the current area of interest! You should stabilize one of your two weak groups in the upper center.
MR: Suboptimal variations for both sides follow.
MR: At least now all groups are settled for life - a good opportunity to pause and reevaluate the position ...
MR: It seems to me that you are not sure of your own plans here! If you do not have a clear plan to cut stones apart, you should better play large endgame moves! Suggestions are S4, L2, B3.
bad move 1
bad move 2 yeah... now I'm loosing
slow
I had thought that h5 would prevent this, but it doesn't...
MR: I would not want to allow black to capture the stones J/K3.
I had read out that this cut didn't work so I wasn't worried...
create the force to capture
This is black's loosing move. the w group in the center can't die and this is only 6 points in gote with no follow up.  MR: Oh, then there were so many "loosing moves" in this game ...
Finally I get to play all the edge move's I've been waiting and waiting for  MR: As written before, you should have switched to normal endgame before J8!
1 pt force to capture in sente...
mistake
hey I got him to waste a ko threat :)
wow free points
Black could also consider playing at A here.
I am not sure if this is a good option here,
a mistake in reading
cddc- i think this would have been better at "A" but idk  Is this move really necessary? B and C are very big here. Your move is gote.
Black has made a heavy group
This move feels a bit uncomfortable. Black would be happy to play a pincernow to use his wall, or indeed just to push you into his wall.  A is an honest move, but it seems too slow now. I might think about B, splitting the side.
cddc- nice direction by "B" i think  yes, if he created a wall in the other direction he would have no extension.
a joseki mistake
the punishment is at A
strange to play here now
hmm a new joseki :)
A might be possible also
this doesn't seem to work while your stones are in atari. better extend.
overextension must always be punished.
slow
Black looks quite happy
also quite slow. A is very big for Black now.
a good move
interesting, Black could run still
I cannot understand this move
Black is dead already?
ai ai ai ai play at A please
more gote :'-(
should i have gone deeper?  you would come under heavy attack if you went further. Even here, I think it is too much.
very bad. A is so big
Something outrageous has happened :)
cddc- this is hard for me, i let it grow too much  I don't understand what hapened here? You didn't see the atari, or you thought it was a good exchange?
very odd, why not just block?
A is still big here, then black could go for B afterwards
terrible play
A was the only move
Since playing A was unconditionally alive, with a picnic ko, I would prefer to play there.
just A was fine actually
This game was very odd. You must consider what is sente and what is gote more carefully in your games. Overall you show good whole board vision, but you are overstretching a little.
[kb]: A note about fusekis like this.  Amateurs have the freedom to play whatever fusekis they want, but if you want to improve, you need to play moves that you understand.  I hope that you've done a little bit of research about this fuseki before you played it.
[kb]: Black plays this move when you want to emphasize the right side.  Is that what you want?  Enclosures are all okay too.  I would play P16 in a game like this ;)
I think Black should be happy with this result - you got the corner and sente.
I saw this move in several pro games so i guess it's right  [kb]: This kind of game is very hard to understand, even for stronger players.  This move's direction seems okay though.
It's not the first time for me seeing this move but i can't find any dictionnary of joseki that treat about it. Can you tell me how to handle it ?  [kb]: Just protecting the corner looks okay.
[kb]: This move feels wrong - usually this aims for a very strong attack or to just protect territory.  There are so few stones on the right side, so Black can't really attack very strongly.
[kb]: Good
[kb]: This move's direction is wrong.  Playing this move aims to seal in White or to lean off it to attack another group.  Actually, the P3 stone is stronger than this White group, so you should lean off of it.
[kb]: Good move by White, althought just connecting at R9 and letting Black get what he wants is also okay.
[kb]: Too small right now
[kb]: Now Black is in trouble.
[kb]: Pushing like this is certainly bad, it lets White get fourth line territory for free...  but Black has little choice.
was this move too much ?  [kb]: Yes.  So far White has gotten about 15+ points on the lower side, while Black got about 10 points on the top right side.  It was Black's corner to begin with :(
[kb]: Why bother connecting this stone?  You can't kill this group.  Enclose it and let him live small.
[kb]: Now White is out again.  Black missed his chance.
i didn't see this move, so i guess i had to protect sooner  [kb]: This is because of O9.
[kb]: Good move.
[kb]: White should take the ko.
now i think the trade is better for white  [kb]: Yes, because it looks like the variation from move 85, but White captured some of Black's central stones.
[kb]: Heavy move.  What does it threaten?
[kb]: White found a good cutting point.
a big mistake  [kb]: Only if you don't follow up.
[kb]: You saved the Black stones but at what cost.
[kb]: The other 3-4 point is better ;)
when white played here i knew i lost  [kb]: Then it's a good time to resign ;)
[kb]: The center points are not so large, it's better to save your stones.
[kb]: This cut is not useful
[kb]: Huge
[kb]: Heavy again - try to attack the bottom White stones first.
fantomas27 [1k]: merci pour le temps :) gradoub [1k]: np
now i think i'm too much behind to hope to win.  [kb]: I agree.  Thanks for the chance to review (this is the last comment)
With the marked stone in place, is this really a good move? I would prefer A or B instead.
Better the normal move at A.
seems natural
Now, A is a very good point for Black.
Black should have played at A
Maybe better at A?
If Black wants to cut, A is better, no? But I would prefer to play at B anyway.
This is dangerous.
I don't think Black should answer here. Having played the marked stone, A is logical next move. Losing the four stones isn't so big, since the white group was strong already.
Of course I, too, can't read such a complicated fight, but here Black really should play at A instead. Please try the variations after that - I think Black is winning there!
b got thickness but i felt i got nice bunch of points.  Sure, White is ahead here, but not by that much, I think...
A should be an idea, too.
B should play at A here :)
This is to slow, I think. Better at A!
Better at A.
wrong timing?  Hm. I think splitting the right side would be less troublesome?
I would jump to A instead.
A strange move. Black is still behind, so A to make the left side as big as possible should be more interesting?
Both sides play dame points, I think. Isn't A big?
Now Black has  a chance.
i should tenuki here?  It's a big move :)
it seems like it was too slow  Much too slow! Even a pure territorial move like A is much bigger.
What was wrong with A instead
ive should just take the stone,but i didnt see the danger :{  Yes, but the game is good for Black anyway. Look at all the stones White played on the left side without gaining anything! Starting action there with the marked stone instead of playing A was a bad strategy, I think.
If you want to continue here, you should make an eye with A.
You should have played this somewhat earlier
b+res i was suprised to see i was behind even before i lost the group thanks for your time  --------------------------------------  This was a very interesting game :) Too sad you lost it in the end...   Good luck with your next games!
reid: This is an unusual pincer.  A is usual, and B is also common.  Black can safely tenuki here and see how things develop.  He will seek to make J3 into a bad move later.
reid: By attaching underneath, black allows white the chance to make J3 into a good move.  I think black A (trying to make J3 bad) would be a better answer.
reid: The avalanche looks like a good choice for white here
reid: But this is a severe mistake for white.  Joseki is for white to extend at A.
reid: However, black fails to punish white.  Black should hane at A.  White has no good answer.  Black C3 is worse than just failing to punish white's mistake.  It actually helps white to build a nice moyo on the bottom.
reid: Locally, this is joseki, but look at how well the white stones are working together. Globally, black is falling behind.
reid: If white wants to continue here, the correct move is A.  Of course, that might not be sente in this situation, but the exchange of white D6 for black C7 is good for black.  White should simply extend to C directly, without playing D6 (or A).
reid: White takes the critical point, and now the result is very good for white.  Black has three (and a half) corners, but they are small.  All the white stones are working together well.  Black F3 seems to be a wasted stone.  White doesn't have any bad stones on the board.  Looking at territory, black has about 12 points in the lower left and 6 to 8 in the lower right.  The upper left is joseki and four stones each, so the points should be the same.  Black's upper right stone is worth 13 points (twice komi - actually a bit less since K17 and Q6 reduce its value slightly).  So if the white moyo is worth 12 + 7 + 13 - komi = 25 1/2 points, the game is even.  I think it's worth more than that, so black is behind.
reid: hmmm, black helps white to build the moyo even bigger.
reid: White is greedy - simpler would be extending to A.  Black is pushing white along on the fourth line.  On an otherwise empty board, it is hard to say which is better: black on the third line or white on the fourth line.  But on this board, with J3 and the D5 stones already in place, it is better for white.  And since black is pushing from behind, it is even clearer that exchanging black R6 for white A is good for white.
reid: Black is behind, so he needs to do something a lot more aggresive than this.  This is a very slow move.  Cutting at A would be more interesting.  Black is trying to take advantage of the overplay at R7 and the cut at P4.  At a minimum, black should at least exchange S7 for R8 (in sente).  He could then tenuki to try some kind of invasion of the white moyo.
reid: Ouch.  Having to make this move in gote is painfull to say the least.
reid: White A would also be a good way to continue - perhaps more natural and aggresive.  It helps alleviate the problem of the cut at Q7, and it doesn't put all white's eggs in one basket.  K8 feels to me like it's asking for too much.  White is trying to take about 50 points (in gote).  If black invades successfully, white could be in trouble.  But white is ahead, so he still has the advantage.  Protecting the cut directly with B would be a bit slow, but still better than K8, I think.  It makes A and C miai.
reid: Black misses the important point here:  The Q16 stone still has miai (O17 and R14), so it doesn't need help right away.  In contrast, the Q9 stones are floating around loose in a sea of white stones.  They need help *right now*!  The proverb says "play the urgent move, not the big move" - this is a perfect example.  Black should be thinking about how to stabilize the Q9 stones while reducing the white moyo.  Perhaps a probe at A (M6) to see how white responds, for example.
reid: I think this attack is from the wrong side.  White wants to realize his profit from the moyo on the bottom, so he should be thinking about A or B to attack instead of O10.  Since black already has Q16/O17 in place, O10 doesn't have much future potential.  White C would also be a good point - gouge out black's corner while stabilizing the R11 stones.
reid: Black gives up a lot here.  The Q9 stones are worth more than 10 points, and now the S11 stones are impregnable.  Adding insult to injury: the M8 stones still don't have any real eye shape - they are floating.
reid: The M8 stones are taking away white territory, but to win, you have to make territory, not just take it away.
reid: eh?  what is N3 for?  These white stones are so strong, they don't need any more help.  And N3 doesn't attack the black stones - they aren't even surrounded yet.  White A is much larger.  Attacking with B is also better.
reid: Black only takes a few more points with this response.  Since C7 and C14 are both low and very strong, the left side is small.  White E8 shouldn't really be sente.  The upper right corner is bigger (black A, for instance)  The remainder of this game is really just settling the yose.  The game was decided when black played at C3, and there have been no major upsets since then.  This was a pretty easy game for white, I think.  Black needs to become aware of the use and value of outward facing power.  Simply taking territory is not sufficient to win a game.  Particularly early in the game, power (influence) can be much more important.  Perhaps black should try to play more power-oriented games.  Make the decision to go for power early in the game and see where it leads.  You will probably lose a few games to start with, but your play should become more balanced as a result.  Good luck, play strong - reid  Analysis ends here.
H: That's probably too far an extension. If white plays A, B is under heavy attack.  I'd suggest A, but C is also possible.
H: If black want's to attack white A, playing B would be better, as it immediately pincers A.  In case you don't want to attack immediately, the left side is open to extensions (C,D) and large-scale moves (around E)
H: The contact move at A should not be ignored as it both attacks black B and tries to strenghen/settle white C.  Playing D would reinforce blacks stones immediately
H: Playing A would secure the upper left corner. B is a more fragile extension. But there's nothing perticularly wrong about it, I think.  Another strategy would have been: use whites weakness in the C,D,E-"Group" to build a solid wall facing the center (see variation).
H: I doubt that black can capture the white intruder (see variation). And the black wall (A,B) is not securing any territory.  Defending at C would have secured the corner with D becoming a very weak stone. (So black can build territory by attacking the fleeing white stone)
H: good move. As white gives up A, black takes it. Big corner!
H: Black could have played A first. This will make points in the corner and white must respond. So black keeps sente (for e.g. playing B next)
H: If a 4-4 (A) is attacked by the 3-3 (B), the defender can decide, whether he wants the resulting wall be in horizontal or vertical direction. (see variation)  Although I don't think, playing C is wrong, I would have chosen D (horizontal wall), which fits nicely with E and F building a big black moyo on the left.
H: Good move.
H: Playing A would have been another possibility (see variation)
H: Good sequence by black
H: I'm not sure what black tries to accomplish, here. So I guess it's a lost move.  Alternatives are:  1) Playing A to strengthen the black group and to aim at cutting white off the center  2) Building potential territory: B, C, D  3) Playing E to cut off white while building potential territory
How could I have played this sequence more strongly?  H: This depends on what your aim is. If you want to keep the corner (capture white), reducing white's eye space is most important (see variation starting at A.  Playing B could help getting the marked territory
H: Mistake. White A would capture the black stone (see variation)
H: but white does not see this, black is lucky
D13 then A17?  H: D13 does not help as white connects underneath (see variation)  White's alive, I think (see variation)
H: Black should run in the direction of A (see variation), building potential territory
H: black is not yet connected! (see variation of whites next move)
H: good connection
H: not bad, but there are bigger moves like A, B or C Attacking D would be possible, too.
H: good sequence
H: this move does not help black's territory. Playing A or B does.
H: if white played more aggressive, he could punish black A by playing B, C or D
H: good move
H: black could cut at A instead (see variation)
Note - Silly mistake.
M13 is a much better move here than what I did (015).  H I don't think so. Black made a mistake later on.
H: mistake. Black should play A (see variation)
H: now this is a desaster as white runs right into blacks territory
H: good idea to use the ko, but is black sure, white has less threats?
H: mistake. white B should have been at A
H: unnecessary move. better play A or B
H: unnecessary again
H: the marked stones are the minimal living group in a corner. black must prevent it (by playing the last point, white is missing: A2)
Note - What move sequence could have prevented his invasion in the lower left from living?  H: See variation before  (End of review)
[SC] This move is ok, but usually a move at A B or C is played.  See variations.
[SC] This is a good move, but it would be more natural to defend the corner first at A.  White would then extend from his two stones to B
[SC] This move is not needed, and is very small.  Black has much bigger moves at A B and C.  See variation.
[SC] This move neither makes territory nor creates good influence.  If you wanted to extend from the corner stone it is best to do so along the 3rd or 4th line (some examples shown by circles)  However I feel a move at A is in the right direction, as it would work well with the marked stones and give black influence and territory
[SC] Blacks stones are overconcentrated, and are not working efficiently.  In response to white's move it would be better to either defend the corner at A or approach the other corner with B.  However, neither A or B work efficiently due to blacks previous move.  See variations for more info.
[SC] The right move.
[SC] This removes blacks aji but I think black has other priorities such as A or B
[SC] This is too submissive.  The points black gains from defending here are much smaller than taking up a big point on the board.  In particular black would want to use his strong shape at the top and take the right hand side with A or make an approach move at B.  See variation
[SC] White strikes at blacks underbelly..
[SC] White could fight with A, but would lead to a very complicated fight and the result is unclear (though I think black is favourite here)
[SC] A necessary move.
[SC] This is a small move from white and should be ignored.  If black were to play A instead he would create a large sphere of influence with the marked stones and take the lead.
[SC] If black were to play A, the white stones would be in major trouble.
[SC] I like this move, as it confines the marked stones to the side, which is advantageous to black
[SC] A small move.  Again, K4 is the important point.
[SC] I would have rather played A as this creates something of a moyo.  See variation.
[SC] Big mistake from white.  Black can now confine her to the corner and make a large moyo in the process.
Should I have played E4 here?  [SC] Yes.  The standard joseki is shown in the variation
Was that a mistake?  [SC] This is probably blacks best answer.  The mistake comes later on.
[SC] The mistake is here -  Black is too weak to think about killing this stone outright
Should I have played E6 here?  [SC] Yes, E6 is the safest move and saves black a lot of complications.  See variation
[SC] White threatens to link up with the marked stones.  A is the most straightforward way to deal with this.   See variation after 76 to see how white can connect
[SC] White tries to make eyespace rather than connect - possibly because he missed it.  Either way it is going to be very hard to kill white outright.  First, I would defend blacks weakness with A, which white must defend against. Then I would take territory along the bottom with B.  See variation
[SC] A good idea threatening to cut off white, but black has weaknesses on the left he needs to attend.
[SC] There is still territory at the bottom to be contested.  A would be a nice point to take
G8 here?  [SC] If you have faith in your life and death skills then this is a good move, as it cuts white off from her allies.  It is possible to kill white but the variations are complex so i wont include them
[SC] Not a necessary move
[SC] Black can ignore this move and still kill white BUT it would have been much easier by simply responding with G7.  I have lost many games I should have won by ignoring similar moves
[SC] This move is small and ends in gote, so is a move best saved for the endgame.  Black has bigger priorities such as taking profit at the bottom.
Shoul I have played somewhere else here?  [SC] I would prefer to connect the marked stones with either A or B as this saves a complex fight
Cutting with A is the best and simplest way of dealing with this attempt to connect
[SC] Probably the best black can do in such a position
[SC] Good forcing move, points in sente
Where should I have played here?  [SC] See variation
Should be A
And again...
[SC] Small move.  A is the best endgame move at this point, and is in sente
[SC] Black does not need to fear the cut.
ChidoRi has resigned the game.
Is the high or low approach standard here?  [DP Either is ok - there is a vast set of joseki starting from both these moves - standard book would be 38 Basic Joseki from Elementary Go Series.  C15 joseki are probably better known, so worth learning the low approach moves]
[DP This is a standard joseki move]
[DP Yes, this is the right idea - separate W]
[DP Would prefer C17 here, hitting underneath, but this move is ok too]
[DP Yes, this is fine]
[DP Yes, fine by W]
Is this the right choice joseki?  [DP Too early - you are not yet stable - after the C17,C18 exchange, you should pull back to C16.  Then you can attack W]
[DP Better for W would be C16, taking all the top and the corner, and leaving B very thin]
[DP Again, the C16 pull back is better. This move forces W to play C12, separating you]
Was the knight the correct jump for splitting and putting pressure on white?  [DP Much better to extend to C7, which puts pressure on W D4, gives you a base, and also attacks W C12 stones. See variation]
[DP You are trying to attack, so avoid contact moves.  C6 would have been better]
[DP Good - this extension was vital.  C7 works now because you have E9 and F9 in place]
[DP Not urgent or big at this stage.  Q10 would have been good for a san-ren-sei, or C16 to give those stones some stability]
[DP If W is prepared to ignore B4, then you might as well take C3 immediately]
[DP This does a good job, because it gives you a bit of space for the D15 stones.  The downside is that it allows W to stabilise further]
[DP Too many contact moves - this helps W make shape]
[DP C3 better, since H4 does not link the W stones or put pressure on B]
[DP This is good - a big move, separating W]
[DP This is ambitious and too early.  B has many options, but should essentially attack this stone and head towards the centre, putting the fear of death into the H10 stones. The capping move at P10 is a good way to start - see variation]
[DP The problem with this attack is that W can run to the centre and save his H10 stones]
[DP Be careful of the large knight's move - there are a lot of complicated joseki resulting from the 3-3 point invasion.  Safer would be O17]
[DP Yes, this is essential to keep W separated]
[DP As I was saying....]
Correct direction?  [DP No, better is R16, which allows you to build up pressure on the R13 W stones, retain sente and continue the attack on the H10 stones]
A misread, played too quickly, overplay.  [DP Yes, surrounding stones make a big difference to W's invasion]
[DP Right idea in terms of stones to attack, but far too close.  Again, the P10 capping move does the job]
[DP No, this loses the initiative.  Keep up the pressure on the centre stones, with a choice of K6 or P10]
[DP Yes, HUGE move for W.  Turns the course of the game]
[DP This move lacks fighting spirit.  K6 attacks W and allows you to build territory]
Is it possible to kill white?  [DP Probably not, because you have a weak point at E7 which allows W to counter attack.  C3 is the obvious move to try, but would be hard]
[DP Always squeeze from the outside first. That way you will retain sente, and make yourself stronger.  For instance, E5 defends your weak point whilst attacking W. See variations]
[DP W plays a good defensive sequence here, pressuring B along the 2nd line making the F8 cut very threatening]
[DP This move doesn't really work for W as it makes B play D8 which defends the weak point at F8]
[DP Stop trying to kill W here - it's not possible - so take your profit with G4, linking all your stones and keeping sente, following with Q3 for a massive game-winning territory]
[DP Yes, good for W]
KafKa: sorry. disconnected.  [DP B is just helping W here, by removing his own ko threats]
[DP Yes, this is where the crux of this game lies]
This move felt thin, but I wanted to link up the stones.  [DP You don't need to.  Attack W with something like K12 or the cap at P10]
[DP Ambitious... W should simply play through the gap and B is in trouble]
[DP Good by W - contact moves in DEFENCE to make shape]
Here I was kind of just probing, perhaps it was aji keshi.  [DP There is nothing here now - the time has passed.  Much much better would be O3, possibly Q3]
[DP Overplay.  L18 is the correct move, but C16 is bigger]]
[DP but if W lets you get away with it, then fine...!]
[DP Yes, something needed doing here]
This move should have been mine, would have made a big different in the score.  [DP Quite right!]
Overplay on my part, next time this sequence occurs I will know better.  [DP No, your moves are quite correct.  Just needs the right follow-up.]
[DP Ouch.  Not pretty.  P2 kills W]
I lost a lot here; perhaps there is a better sequence, or maybe it is too late. White played this sequence fairly quickly; I'm sure he knew exactly how to exploit.  [DP It's the infamous empty triangle.  P3 was a bad move - the hane at P2 would have been much better. The game is now over as W has a massive lead, so no substantial comments from here on]
Is there any way to profit more than the way I did here?  [DP B18 bigger and sente]
[DP This is sente and must be answered at Q14]
I played this sequence very badly, Perhaps I should have sacrificed 10 stones; the result is very bad.  [DP See move 170]
This seemed necessary; perhaps there was a better way.
My territory which should have been much bigger was reduced to 2 points; I played very badly here.
I saw this sequence before, and knew how to punish black for ignoring joseki.
Carey: There is no way to escape from this.  Extending here is a wasted move.  See variants
Perhaps I should have extended on the other side for more influence.
I wasn't sure here where to tenuki to. I ended up approaching the lower right hoshi stone with a low knight. Perhaps there was a better move out there?
Carey: I think this is one of the better moves in this situation
I feel like this choice of joseki benefited him more than it benefited me. Perhaps there is a better sequence.
Carey: Tenuki here is not good.  White can easily invade at A and either make life or escape and put pressure on your separated groups.  He could also push at B and cause all sorts of problems. A for black is mandatory here.
This is a trick play I read somewhere. Luckily black fell for it.  Carey: Since Black does not have N3, a push with White Q5 is a good move.  However, it's a little premature.  There are still a lot of points to be made in the top left.  White can put pressure on black with A (preferred), or make some solid points with B.
Carey: Jump doesn't work
Again, I wasn't sure where to tenuki. Perhaps this move was too vague. Not sure where else to have gone, though.  Carey: I think A would of been better because it puts pressure on black's weak group, but the fact that you ignored M4 rather than responding is a good first step.
Carey: This is a very slow move.  It is almost a thank-you move with black following up with A and taking large territory on the side..
Too slack?  Carey: I'm not quite sure what the point of this move is.  A would have been a good solid 10 points and put pressure on black.   Remmeber, corners first, then sides, then center.  This move is premature.
Now black took the points because he didn't have to respond to white's E13.
This attack may have been premature; however I felt I was stronger in the area than black.  Carey: This was a good attack, at the right time.  You can either separate black's two weak groups or you can let him live small underneath and take some great center influence.
Carey: Good response, keep him separated.
Carey: I'm not sure this is requried.  I would of played at A and put pressure on black's group.  He would of had to respond.
Carey: I would of saved this for a Ko threat
Carey: Not a good move by black, A captures easy.
Carey: Black should definitely play A next, to keep pressure on white's group with one, possibly zero eyes (if black can play at B)
Carey: Wrong move for white.  See variant.  Black is dead.
Carey: Play A first.  Sente and protects black connecting underneath
Too slow? Maybe there is a bigger move out there.
Here black tries to invade; when someone does it like this it is very annoying.  Carey: Really?  It's not annoying to me.  I love it!  Black CLEARLY has no room to live here.  Just contain him and he won't get any eyes.  You get to be on attack for the rest of the game.  How can that be annoying? :)
Carey: Good first move.  Now just stay solid.
Carey: This move is a little slow .  Try A or B instead.
Carey: what's wrong with double atari at A?  See variants
Carey: This is spreading very thin, bad shape here.  There is no way to keep him from escaping, I would just make sure that the four stones at A don't get to connect up and minimize damage.
Carey: Double atari at A better.  See variant.
Carey: Good, solid eye-killing move.
Carey: A is better.  He's struggling for life.  You need to stay solid.
Carey: If you had played at A, this wouldn't of even been an option for black
Carey: White can ignore this move.
Here is a very big mistake I made. I played this move too quickly without thinking.  Carey: Yes :)  Just fill in Ko, black still dead.
Carey: Not a ko threat!  It's a snapback for white.  White should of filled Ko!  See variant.
I think I had good control of this game. However, I'd still like to know what areas I need improvement in. Thanks for reviewing my game! Your comments are very helpful! - Jeremy W  Carey: No problem.  The biggest improvements you can make right now, at your level, are you in your openings.  Not all beginning moves need to be responded to.  Extending 2-3 spots on the third or fourth line can be worth 10-20 points.  So think about that the next time you consider responding to your opponent on the small scale.  It's best to step back after every move and look at the WHOLE board.  Read out what direction a local battle will push you.  When you invade, think about how easy it is for you to escape compared to how easy it is for your opponent to escape.  I know you've probably heard this all before, but just concentrate a little more on it and you'll improve :)  Last but not least, don't get irritated when an opponent makes an overplay.  You should revel in it!  You should look at the overplay and think to yourself "Woohoo!  That just cost him the game!!  Now I get to make him suffer!" :)  As you can see, that one single overplay cost him the entire game; he got nervous because of your moyo.  Rather than throw a stone in an impossible invasion, he should of just tried to get his own big moyo.
RS: So, you're using the Low Chinese fuseki. This is an influenced-oriented strategy. Usually beginners prefer using a territory-oritented strategy since this is easier to understand. At least, I preferred territory. If you want to continue using this fuseki, take a look here: http://senseis.xmp.net/?ChineseFuseki  The basic idea of influenced-oriented fusekis is you threaten to make a huge amount of territoy and W *must* invade (which is what you want. Strange, no?). You then make territory by attacking W's group.
I was really uncertain where to start an invasion here. If this was aggresive enough or if I overextended.  RS: As I mentioned 1-3-5 are an influenced-oriented fuseki. In keeping with this, you should not invade. Having said that I know how hard it  is to play this type of fuseki. Therefore I will comment on your B7 rather then the fuseki.  For starters, W4 is very strange for a beginner. I usually only see 6d and up on KGS play so high. This is very difficult for a beginner or anyone under 1d to play effectively. The problem with W4 is it leaves the corner very open. I would be very happy if I were playing B. See the 3 variations for other  possible ideas.  Variation a & b instead of B7 keep up the idea of creating a large moyo (potential territory). Var. c could be seen as an invasion.
RS: A basic idea in go is try to keep your stones connected while seperating your opponent's. Here's a good time to demonstrate that. You played at A. B can be played.
RS: Here's something to keep in mind. This move only helps W. You are correct that this forces W to move here and you end in sente, BUT you can later use the space at b6 to help you invade on the left side. See variation.
RS: You do not have to play here. If W, did you can easily defend. There are much bigger moves: k4, d14, k10, etc.
With B23, you let him seal you in on the lower side. See variation a.
RS: W could have play h2. See variation.
RS: There are 2 things here: 1) After your last move, j3, you saw W was getting a large moyo. It is good that you were aware enough and saw it. Others would not have at your rank. 2) Your choice of invasion was not the best. There's a saying in Go, "Play away from strength." That W wall towards the bottom is huge strength. It looks like you're not playing close, but this is. Since W did not know how to use it, you got away from with this. Otherwise W could have given you problems and most likely got big territory too. See variation.
RS: Good! Since W played g16 this is better then playing b16.
I felt some of the points I got in this match was because my opponent was very forgiving in nature. A better opponent would easily pick my strategies apart.  RS: W was not so much forgiving as he did not know how to attack, but the result for you was the same.
RS: This move at b13 I believe is better because you can more easily make 2 eyes.
RS: see variation for W on next move.
RS: Actually playing at e15 is safe.
RS: This is a forcing move by W. B needs to answer this. See the variations.
RS: You do this also in the lower right later on. Leaving a weak group open to an easy attack. In this case, the upper left side. Be12 (an exension of 1 line rather then a diagonal play at f12) is urgent.
RS: Of course W should have played at k17 since your next move takes away too much.  On the other hand, W could cause big problems and maybe even kill B on the upper left by starting at 'a'. See variation.
RS: If you want to play around here, I think m15 would be better for a good beginning to a B moyo. See variation.
RS: See variation.
This move and moves around this group I was very uncertain.  When things get complicated and tactical, I tend to not play very confidently.  RS: Understandable you would feel this way. I felt the same way. One thing that helps is to read out the sequence as far as possible. In the beginning, this will be only a few moves. However, with consistent practice, it *will* improve. Don't give up. Read as far as possible every time.  Counting liberties as described in the beginning will really help during tactics.
RS: I was very surprised by W's moves from W56 up to here. W has successfully sealed B's upper left group and has begun a wall on the right side giving him a good foundation for center territory.
Very uncertain about moves here and onwards trying to let my group escape.
RS: Huge mistake for W. See the variation at to why B85 was bad.
RS: B should continue with g11.
RS: W could have ignored this move. See variation fo next move.
Important cut?  RS: Sorry, but not at all. W responded correctly.
RS: Ahhhh! L17! L17!
RS: Ah, good! You saw it.
RS: This does not save your stones. See variation of W's next move.
RS: Completely unnecessary. Better moves are r5, n4, p8, k3.
RS: See the W stones 58 and 142 and how there is a space in between them at X? Whenever this happens, you almost always get something out of playing there, especially this time. See variation.
RS: B145 is not necessary. See variation for playing elsewhere and a continuation here when W plays first. When W plays first at B145, he does not get anymore territory, not 1 point more. Therefore you can play elsewhere. For instance, the lower right corner would be very good.  Also, W can kill your 4-stone group at n12. See variation.
RS: Now it's safe, but not the lower right corner.
RS: See variation.
RS: NO! Do not capture unless you *have* to. This is just another way of passing, meaning giving W a free move. You could have used this move to play in the lower right. If W knew more, he could proably kill the corner and win.
RS: Not necessary. There are bigger moves: lower right.
RS: Let's count liberties for this play here. W's triangle has 4. This initially looks good since I said anything less then 5 requires attention. However, 2 things to consider: 1) when W connects at f4 W triangle is safe, and 2) B square only has 2 liberties and can force your play. I would play k3 if I were W.
RS: This is much better at n3.
RS: No. Lower right at n3.
RS: Do not try this with me! :-)  See variation. This variation is why you should not attack from this side but strengthen the corner instead.
S8 would kill my stones?  RS: Absolutely! However, if I were W, I would not play s8. I wold go for the corner. W has good chances to easily kill.
RS: B triangle is only 1 stone. Your whole corner is in danger. Br3 is urgent.
RS: YIKES!!  Wg2 kills your 5 stones.
RS: W could kill with p2 or q1. See variation next move. W being able to kill your lower right corner has been aroudn since W118, for 73 moves.
RS: See variation for just a little more territory and sente.
RS: Unnecessary. See variation.
RS: Unnecessary.
dispositio [8k]: hi dispositio [8k]: ,gg
adamworth [8k]: hi adamworth [8k]: gg
Small chinese to the double wing? I read on Sensei's library afterwards that this is bad because my opponent could invade at R17 and cause inefficiency. Is this true in this case?  **** Your move seems fine to me.  I looked up some variations using gobase and the 4 I found are marked with triangles. I am not strong enough to comment on the merits of each or to say why your move was not included.
**** I've been told "never pincer an already pincered stone".  Take a look at a sample variation starting at black R15.  I think the outcome is better for black
**** I wonder about black Q14 here.  If white gets enclosed, it's a big win.  Even if they get out, you're likely to have stronger groups that would allow you to avoid defending your groups later.
**** Starting from this point, you have a lot of potential to torture those 3 white stones.  An early attack should be able to strengthen your bottom and lead to some nice territory.  I'm not sure if R8 is correct, but it is fine given white's response.  A further follow up around O6 should really put that whole area in your favor instead of white's
**** This ends in gote.  Try to find another move. The triangles are some candidates (there's probably others too)
**** R18 works is enough to guarantee white's life and it reduces your corner.  Because of this, R15 is a mistake.  I'd suggest R18 instead
This move is obviously bad in retrospect. I was playing way too quickly. I could have milked this attack for alot longer I think.
**** This feels like an unnatural distance from the right group.  The strength of the group implies that there are a number of later invasions.  I'd recommend staying a bit closer (K3 or L3) or to go much further away (F3).
Too early to think about the left? I guess I should secure the bottom first?  **** Reducing the left seems reasonable, this points to the potential problem with the choise of J3 earlier
**** I don't think black has the time to make this move.  The bottom/right white group can easilly press the 3 black stones along the bottom.  Overall, that area has turned out much worse that it should have.  white has lots of aji to push black around.  I've marked the stones that seem inefficient.  Beyond that, if you look earlier in the game, you'll see plenty of opportunity to pressure the right side and prevent this kind of negative result.
**** Play away from thickness.  I'd recommend C6 along the side since you then have aji to invade the corner.  It relieves your later pressure to settle.  It also starts to connect to your 3 weak stones on the bottom.  I'm still thinking that a move to pressure white such as J7 may be good to help resolve that bad aji.
What is a good response to this? I wasn't sure how to settle the left group.  **** I think playing away from the area is best. If there were no other big plays, C8 should stabilize the group.
**** Here, I would cut at H7.  Even if you still plan to sacrifice the bottom stones, you're likely to get additional profit as white tries to get the eyes that they need
In retrospect, perhaps M14 is better?  **** Perhaps I tried to do what I thought would be the natural variation starting at M14It's a delicate balance with portecting your moyo and the bottom.  I believe you need to stop trying to block all paths and white will eat away at the O11 area.  You may need to also watch the safety of the right group.
Is this the right move?  **** I like M16 instead, but it may be that the added stability helps the later fight
**** White should be able to kill.  I did a sample variation.  It doesn't look like an easy fight for white, but I think there's enough aji to pull it off
I know I'm losing and hope to get lucky here. This is bad play. Is there a better approach to the bottom left corner? (I know that M10 i s URGENT. I just didn't see it until the end of the game.)
adamworth [8k]: hi?
dispositio [8k]: ?yeah hi
**** White had some interesting aji, but is short on liberties.  I played out the variation as if white wasn't short on liberties.  Probably instead of O2, white should have tried Q6?  Once that fails, they must play M10
adamworth [8k]: gg dispositio [8k]: thx adamworth [8k]: thx for the game  He resigns. I also probably play some useless moves in Yose. I've just overlooked weaknesses in groups before.  Thanks again for the help!!
paragoomba [15k]: hello  --  Always nice to say hello to your opponent. :)  To be honest, I don't know enough about opening theory to understand this move. If you're comfortable with it, then it's fine, but make sure that you understand why you're making a particular move.
kirby3 [15k?]: hi
This is the first actual contact between the two of you, and I'd say that you panic slightly. Because of the height of the marked stone, the corner is open for invasion. I think that I would have preferred either to make an enclosure by playing at 'A', or approaching the white stone at 'B' for move 5.  (I should point out that nothing I say is "right". I can only give you "how I'd play"!)  As it is, you need to do two things in this situation: (1) Lean on the white stone (if you can) and (2) Secure your own stones.
I think that this move would be reasonable if you had a stone on the star point. As it is, the corner feels too open for it to threaten the white stone. I would probably have played at 'A' to backup the marked stone, or at 'B' to close up the corner.  Now that white has invaded your area, it's up to him to live. Whatever you do, try and make the most of it!
Although I'd be tempted to play this move myself in this situation, I think that it's a little too easy on white. Play the scary moves and you'll learn how to deal with them. In this case, the scary move is the hane at 'A'. It will start a fight, but white is the one who has to live here. By playing at 9, you're just giving white a nice chance to make a solid base on the side.
This is not a good move. I would guess that it's to protect the corner, but there are certainly better ways to do that. The first one that springs to mind is 'A', although I don't think that protecting the corner is really necessary here. At the worst, white can jump a few spaces across. In the scheme of things (at this point in the game) there are far bigger things to worry about.  Give the situation here, I'd opt for ignoring the whole area and approaching somewhere. 'B' would possibly be my choice (a high approach, because your stone in the bottom left is low). The only risk with 'B' is that you might encourage a white framework along the top. If you don't like that, feel free to jump straight into the middle at 'C'. If white approaches from either side, you have plenty of room to live.  The other reason why I don't like this is because it forces white to connect (as he does next move). It's never good to have a stone dangling down, so black should really block at 'A' after white plays there. If you're going to have to play somewhere anyway, it often makes sense to play there first and get it over and done with.
I don't quite understand this move. If it was intended to kill then, well, it didn't. :) You'd be better off connecting at 'A', which gives white two directions to worry about: one is you pushing up the edge into his corner, the other is you using your thickness to jump out into the middle of the board. As it is, you achieve the thickness in the next few moves anyway.
This move isn't really bad, but it's a bit of a waste. If you want to move up in that direction, play at 'A'. In this situation, though, you're focusing too much on the local situation when there are huge swathes of board left unclaimed. This is a perfect chance to play at 'B' (or thereabouts) and stake a claim to the bottom side. Alternatively, you can play at 'C' or 'D' to try and build up a side facing the wall you just made. Again, as a final choice, you could play around 'E' to stop white from joining up his two corners.
Right. This is the first move where you start to show that you're really too concerned with solid territory too early in the game. This move, and the moves that follow it, are an attempt to grab some solid territory to call your own. Unfortunately:  (a) they don't really achieve that (b) they're actually surrounding not that much of the board as a whole (even though it is a lot of territory in itself (c) they allow your opponent to take huge chunks of looser territory that you never get to invade (d) a stronger player would invade them anyway  This move is also too close to your existing base of stones. My suggestions for where to move are the same as for the last move.  (As an aside, if you've played the marked stone, and got the expected follow-up of white 26, you should at least follow it up with a stone at 'A' to prevent an atari that will let your opponent lead you around by the nose.)
Your opponent has more of the right idea, even though I'd say this was either (a) too small for an extension, or (b) too large for an enclosure. It's a classic case of them not deciding which to go for.
Again, this isn't gaining you enough. It's timid, in a way, and still leaves you wide open to invasion on the lower side. My advice of where to move stays the same as the last few moves.
Now white has got the top side, and a nice little framework that covers a good chunk of the board. It's invadable, but because his stones are all low on the side, he'll get something out of the invasions, and it will balance. If white had invaded you on the lower side you would have seriously lost out.  So, as a simple piece of advice: when you want territory on the edge, play on the third or fourth line. Anything above that is invadable.
Again. The bottom side seems huge, but there's plenty of room to invade. You'd end up with an shell of territory with a nice, smug white group inside it. :)
White gets another point in what is turning into a huge framework. If he played around the centre point next, you would have had serious trouble.
This is a bit aimless. It's too high and far away to really achieve much except a vague pressure on the edge of white's group. If I'd been them, I would have jumped up around 'A' and let my framework become more and more solid.  You can still, in this position, invade at 'B'. There's loads of room. You can even invade at 'C', if you're desperate. At the worst, you still have the marked stone dangling. If you press up with it (at 'D') it will at least start to pull your own framework into something big. As it is, you could end up with a sequence like I've shown in the variation.
This attempt to cut can't work, and so just solidifies white's position. If you ignore all the invasions that you should be making, you're better off playing at 'A'. That makes his framework smaller, and yours bigger.
This is the right idea.
A bit unfortunate, this. It demonstrates why the area of "territory" that you have is too loose, though.
No. This doesn't work, as you see later. In this situation you have to cut your losses and defend your territory. A move at 'A' would be much better. As it is, the failed attempt to cut just gives white more of the corner than he needs, and makes his overall position on your side stronger.
Just let it go... :)
This fight is pretty horrible to be honest. :) You both make some errors of judgement, but overall I'd say that white comes out better. Black has completely lost his corner, and a good chunk of the side that he should have. Admittedly, the lower side has become a bit stronger (although I'd still fancy my chances to invade it), but black cannot be happy.
This is an important point: don't play black 69. For a start, it won't work. You can see it won't work, so you shouldn't bother. More importantly, it's removing a ko-threat. If you get into a ko fight later on in the game, the move at black 69 is a lovely threat. If you play it now, for no reason, you remove that potential.   Only take stones exactly when you need to take them, and only force your opponent to take stones when you get something out of it.
You would have been okay not to defend this (and to save the marked stones by playing at 'A'), but I can't criticize you for avoiding the risk.
You should really make sure that your stones are safe before attacking. This move is too greedy. A nice shape move at 'A' would have give you something to play with, especially with the bonus of being able to threaten the marked stones. You wouldn't have been able to kill them, but it would have given you a chance to establish your group. Afterwards you can try to kill that group of three stones.
Now you have very little.
How much did you pay white to make this move? ;)  This was a very, very lucky mistake for black.
White should have ignored this, and solidified territory on the top edge.
This would have been nice for white earlier in the game.
Like I said earlier: take stones only when you have to. You could have achieved a lot more by played at 'A'. The white stone would still have been dead, but you would have pushed down the edge and worried white.
Don't worry about trying to kill the eyespace. It's already alive whenever it wants. Worry more about sealing off your territory.
One point of territory. There are bigger places to play on the board. Even for the aspect of forcing white to take, you're better off waiting for possible kos or for the end of the game.
Better idea, but jumping down to 'A' would have been even better, as it threatens to jump into the corner.
Not good. The atari at 'A' is an obvious move, and hurts a lot. It's still better to jump down a space.
Not necessary when there are bigger points on the board. 'A' is my first example without even looking over to 'B', where there's a very painful monkey-jump waiting to bite you.
Unreasonable, I'd say. Very unreasonable.
A bit late in the day for this. It would have been a good move around 100 moves ago!
Luckily for you, white blocked on the wrong side.
... and then you threw it all away! 'A' lets the group live.
Now it's dead. Let it die. Take the opportunity to play elsewhere.
Finally! :)
White is being unreasonable here.
In general, I'd focus on playing solidly (and avoiding cuts) in situations like this. White doesn't have room to live, so let them thrash around while you calmly make solid walls around them. Do be careful, though. This can be a very stressful part of the game.
All these cross-cuts and hanes are asking for trouble, really. Solid walls.
Ouch! Wrong way. Don't push a cutting white stone down onto your weak group! Atari from the other side so that your group has plenty of room to live.
You're lucky again.
Ignore white. They just don't realise they're dead yet. It's like "Dawn of the Dead".
akatdot [5k]: you guys play a weird tag
F: This is not good,  to leave your stone at H3 alone. After catching this stone, the black group is strong. See variation
F: Black is strong now, so this move would be better at O4. Now an invasion at N3 looks promising for black.
F: one further at C17 is better (and also joseki)
F: Overplay. See variation
F: Black shoulf first play in the corner at C17
F: Now black gets a big corner, you have only a moyo (potential territory)
F: Black should play S17
F: Good
F: This is aji-keshi, you can better leave this move for later. See variation.
F: Not good, this forces black to protect one of his cutting point.  Variation
F: Just connecting at Q2 is better
F: The black group is alive now.
F: Black should absolutely play at Q8
F: Playing at Q8 is very big. The black group at the bottom is very strong, so attacking it has not much use. See variation
F: White should protect the cut at D3, this is small.
F: No black makes his moyo bigger, while threatening an invasion at Q12
F: White should defend the right side. See variation on next move. This is also bad shape. Locally P8 would be better
F: Overplay
F: A white stone at P8 would have made a lot of difference, but now, there is no way to kill black.
Overconcentrated
The extension works well. It might be one space too close but there is potential to expand
N17 is not an ideal extension from the Q17 and R15 stones.
Black ended in gote and white's wall is more solid
White's stones are weakened.
Black's group on top isn't alive or secure. White may do a splitting attack.
I think this move isn't necessary.
Bad exchange for black.
P: Usually black s plays in the upper right. This is a traditional way to show respect to the stronger player who is playing with white.
In hindsight, I wonder if Q10 would have been better here.  P: In principle, in this situation enclosing at A (E17) is slightly bigger than D6 or Q10. D6 is bigger than Q10. My reference for this statement is the workshop lectures vol. 3 by Yilun Yang 7P.  Also be aware that a high approach move such as D6 means you intend to play more of a moyo (influence) style game vs. territorial (such as B at C6).
Black played a few of these odd contact moves, but I wasn't sure how to handle them properly.  P: indeed this move is not very conventional. Just for clarity this move is not a contact move since it does not touch your stone. (more on why I want to distinguish this point later when I talk of sabaki in the upper right sequence)
P: this move is fine by white.
P: very good attacking move, putting pressure on black.
P: G16 is probably better for black.
P: This move is too easy on black.    If white wants to cut, there are ladder considerations but white could do well.  See variation.
P: too easy for black, cutting at A (J16) is best , see previous comment and variations for white at H16.
P: very easy on black, see variation with white A (J17).
Black is sealed in and white gets a wall on the outside - I was quite happy with this.  P: the result is not that great for white since white still has a cutting point and black territory (some of it from the 4th line).   More even results have a trade of thickness on the 4th line and territory within the 3rd line.
P: seems like a much too slow move for white it does not accomplish much.  White A (Q10) now works well with the other white stones and ceates a nice moyo where white has influence.
...and another agressive contact move. How to handle this?  P: yes this type of contact move is ussually used to make some sort of livable flexible shape (called sabaki)inside a white sphere of influence.  White at A (R15) came to  my mind...
P: not sure I agree with this move because since white has some power (except for the cutable point) you try to push black towards your thickness.  It seems counter intuitive at first, but the idea is to push black towards your wall while making territory elsewhere (the web site Sensei's library has some examples on how to use thickness).  I show you one possible variation.
P: this is nice white shape but the white stones at the top are somewhat over-concentrated.
At this point, I felt like the black stones should be killable, but wasn't sure how to go about doing it.  P: yes killable but not easy, see variations later.
Possibly T17 kills the upper right corner, but maybe this is too small? Either way, this move seems long overdue.  P: Sorry I disagree :)  The corner is rather big. In a GTL review for a previous  game a strong player reminded me of a few principles of the game:  1) corners; 2) the side and 3) the center. Of course in go there exceptions but in this situation the corner seems big. See variation.
P: black should have 2 eyes now. This is worth at least 20 points.
By this point, I was quite concerned about a pincer against D6.  P: pushing with B4 maybe first to have options in the corner in case of a pincer.
Overplay? Perhaps having made bad shape for black with E13 I should throw it away.  P: this move seems ok to me.
P: too bad white was one move away from sealing black-in and dominating the center.
By this point I feel like I've let black's left side group live without getting much in return.  P: yes it was difficult on white but if you go back to say move 54, black had more stones in this area so white could not expect too much.
P: good move positive way to play to attack.
What's the correct direction to attack black's centre group at this point. Perhaps attack from the left instead and strengthen my centre group in preparation for an invasion of the lower side? Or is there a more important matter to deal with?  P: this is a hard question, you are indeed correct that this is a critical moment in the middle game.  Attacking the black group would be my priority.  How is difficult. An interesting principle I read for go is to attack while making profit in sente (have the initiative).  How to attack while making profit in this case?  Let's see if I can give you some hints in the next few moves (actually you had a good idea in later moves).
This peep ultimately let me take profit on the lower side, but would cutting have been better?  P: yes your assessement seems correct. Cutting to split the black groups would be my choice. The battle would be hard for both sides but black has much more to lose than white.
P: in the end black connects to save his group while white gets compensation in the bottom.  It comes down to the endgame...
P: notice how black makes territory while attacking and retaining the initiative.
P: good, the sides are the biggest endgame plays now.
P: very nice.
P: too small, E18 is bigger for example.
P: good.
Allowing this was bad!  P: it seems your earlier move at E8 should have been at F11 instead while you had the initiative.
P: as you point out later, K15 is the biggest move.  END OF COMMENTS for review.
I can't believe we both ignored this move for so long! This was the winning margin.
yago36 [12k]: no prob
R1D3R [16k]: miss click
yago36 [12k]: gg
a bit small, and white doesnt need to respond
that's a good white move
this move is strengthening the j3 stone. it's only one stone and by playing htere you are just going to make white extend and become stronger.
you could try and spread out your black stones a bit. the beginning of the game is where you want to spread them out as much as you can - for example, white has stones on the whole left and middle. black only has stones on the right. so white has more potential. instead of just focusing on attacking hte stones around j3, you could play somwhere on the marked areas
see how the j3 group is stronger now because you played j4.  also you could invade the left side of the board (spread stones out more)
no need to play htis. i think your group is hard to kill already so try and find somewhere worth more points. i think this is worth quite little.
R1D3R [16k]: sorry
good geta (net)
see variation on where white shouldve played
white shouldnt play so high cause he's got no base and i think it's gonna be hard to connect to the left group
dont have to play this cause whites already alive
no need this
Ponaryo [4k]: hi  Tengen is very special opening. You may want to find a way to make b's tengen stone not very useful. B will probably want to get into many fights to use his tengen stone.
A: Your move B:I think works better with R9 C:A pincer might be nice to make positions on other sides other than the right.
Your move wasnt bad but you may tenuki here or you can play A or B.
I prefer B.
I dont think this is the right move, its better to enclose black.
Still aji to live but I think b is better now.
You might even consider tenuki to play on top left or so.
B has two weak groups now this is good move.
When black played here it was very good for w but you misplayed it.  B is very good for white.
This was a mistake.
i am not sure about this, because it has bad shape it isnt? (E16 stone look strange)  You have to consider the exchange as well, b's tengen stone is ruining your influence and b just got a big corner of solid territory.
The capping move at B looks better I think.
Well I didnt really get this attack you just pushed him into tengen stone but his stones were very cuttable so you still killed part of it.
Here you really have to look at the game. All your stones are in one area of the board. The only other two stones are very weak.
this one i was misread. :)
but i got my first luck in here  Yes, b should of just connected xD.
B should of extended from other side to make the group strong.
now black lead in much point, so i need to invade him.  I thought the only weakness of black's territory is at around c10/c6 stones. But not sure how to make it.  B created kind of weak groups. Theres a cut at M11 very big. The P2 group can be attacked but not in a severe way. You might want to probe B'scorner around C3.  C5 might do something threaten to go into corner or move out.  I end my comments here, B played thinking he was winning I think making sacrifices here and there for what he thought was more solid play. You took advantage in some cases and got the lead by killing that group. It's not always just luck. :P Good luck in improving.
B plays this very weird should just extend at C5.
Got luck again.
black pasive and i got lucky again.
black want everything, so...
dingo [5k]: tx
BlackStar0 [5k]: Hi
KKMD: Not joseki. I suppose the main reason is that you force white to play a good move, an extension. In this case it is not so valuable because of the position in the upper left quadrant, but still, even if ultimately you will want to play this move, it just seems too early for that right now.
KKMD: Probably a little too far. You are open to an invasion at A. B would be better.
KKMD: Thick move, but your position on the lower side is too low to go for this strategy. White should erase it with moves such as A, and reduce the utility of your wall to zip.
KKMD: The right side is unimportant. Why not answer calmly at A, then?
KKMD: The last white move was a mistake, but you fail to punish it. A seems like an obvious urgent point to take, to deprive white of eye shape.
KKMD: Do you really have time to play like this?  You should probably have taken this opportunity to enlarge your moyo. For now you have a giant wall on the right, but it's hard to see what it wil be used for. You got nothing on the upper part on the board, the center is still empty, and you are low on the lower side. If you want to give some meaning to the wall you just built, you should play in the center, to get territory there. Since it's not really what walls are for, it means that building this wall was perhaps not a good idea in the first place.
KKMD: What is your plan with this move? Your only chance to save the game would be to make territory in the center, so you could be satisfied if white connected underneath and you build yet another outside wall.To do so, a move like A would be standard.
KKMD: This is a catastrophic result. You let white go inside your moyo, and you created a weak group, that white can use to further invade your moyo. That's the last thing you want to happen when playing a moyo-oriented strategy.
KKMD: I think you should have been punished for that move, at least more strongly than what really happened.
KKMD: I don't like this answer, since it gives black the possibility of creating an eye in the corner with the sequence A-B-C. White at B seems better.
KKMD: Here, if white plays A, I can't see how you get out of this situation (then again, it's possible I missed something).
KKMD: OK, you tricked white... sort of. He feels the need to defend his group, so doesn't attack from A, which would be the right direction if possible.
KKMD: The relation to the marked stone is loose, but the idea behind the move is correct.
KKMD: So what if white cuts at A? I give one sequence as an example of what might happen.
KKMD: Defending passively points like that is doable when you're ahead, and white is not attacking something else with his stone. Here, arguably, the game is close enough to just defend your points like that (but even that seems a little doubtful to me); a bigger problem is that you still have an unsettled group, and white stone is aimed at attacking it.
KKMD: This move leaves a cut at A. I don't understand why white didn't cut, now or afterwards. Right now, it's possible that black could get revenge on the white central group, so even if white seems to gain in the exchange, I can understand white would find it dangerous. But a bit later in the game, this cut was risk-free...
KKMD:
KKMD: It was certainly more urgent to escape with your weak group.So don't hesitate, go for A, or maybe B, and forget about your side stone. Then again, white does an excellent job in this last phase of the game.
KKMD: In normal conditions, I would say this: "These stones served you well, white answered submittively to them. Now you should treat them lightly. Threaten to use them to reinforce your dragon, but don't get too attached to them." In this situation, however, you don't have enough territory. Even if you save these stones you'll probably lose; and I'm not counting the cut at A. The game is over.
good [4k]: thx BlackStar0 [5k]: thx
I'm not sure who will end up reviewing for me, but I want to start off by thanking you for taking the time to look at my game.  This is certainly not one of my best games, but perhaps you can find some fundamental flaws in my play, and in my way of thinking.    Are there general things that I am doing poorly?  General advice would be greatly appreciated!    I have left a few of my own ideas and comments are parts that I find particularly bad on behalf of B.  Of course, there may be many things that I don't see, or have misconceived.
janr: the double hane forces white to connect and gives black access to the fourth line
B's groups are both strong. Probably now is not the time to try to strengthen F4.  What do you think?  Perhaps something like D15 instead?  janr: Once black has decided to cut at f4, he should fight and keep white separated.  If he doesnt want to do that, he could simply play tenuki in the first place, threatening to cut later.  G4 is ok as shape
janr: i wouldnt play this bump, but play one more jump
janr: now the white group on the right is one space ahead in the running battle
As a result of dragging my group around from F4, I kept running out.  But after this, it seemed like I was making white quite happy by letting him run along the 4th line.  I thought I had to do something to stop him, so I went for C12...  Is this the wrong line of thinking?  janr: defense first would imply playing at A first, such that the right white group can't chase any further (in sente)
I think that C12 and D15 are kind of weak due to the w stones around them, but maybe getting out with a move like H9 is better here, since the G6 stones are also weak and not in that great of shape.  At this point, I'm already thinking w's position is a bit favorable.  janr: I think it is more urgent to defend the center group.  The group on te left side has already some eye space.
I read out that D9 didn't work and played it anyway.  This was certainly not a good thing to do or a good move.  janr: maybe play A as a defense and attack?
This was to prevent being cut after my planned H12  janr: once black has played at D9, he should continue and connect.  Else white gets a ponnuki in sente.
janr: this move fills an important liberty of blacks group on the left
Perhaps I should try to do something at the top now.  W is very strong in the top left corner.  On the other hand, the wall at the bottom is also quite large...  What do you think is most urgent?...  I chose M3.  janr: black is helpless as long as white can at will make his walls larger by attacking the black center group.  I would prefer to first strengthen this group.
janr: by creating a second weak group, black gets a lot of trouble
I played this move too quickly.  I think it is kind of wimpy.  On the other hand,BM4, WM5, BL5, WL4 doesn't seem like that good of a choice.  Maybe the low pincer at M3 is too bold?  What I can think of offhand would be:  BJ5, WH5, and THEN BM4, WM5, BL5.  After this, if w cuts at L4, he can't cut again at K5, so B can capture the stones.  Still, I don't know if this is best.  What do you think?  janr: having said that m3 was dangerous, the only good shape after m3 is m4.
janr: I would prefer the cut
janr: black is lucky. Whiote should throw in.
A is an important sente move, removing the eye potential of white and preventing the sente move of B
janr: before defending, play sente moves.
janr: this is a very ugly shape
This seems too far from L6.  I don't know if it's good to run out with M6 though because of F10 being kind of weak.  Maybe I should play K11?  Perhaps if I can get a wall, then I can play on the top...  janr: first, it is hard to kill the white stones at A since they almost have 2 eyes.  Second, there is no way to enclose the group at B without cutting points.  Therefore, black should not immediately attack those.  One possibility is in variation, the other is to play tenuki for now, strengthening other groups.
R13 seems a lot better to me than Q14, in retrospect.  janr: indeed
janr: black allows white the hane on top of two stones, which is very painful
W's top left seems too big at this point in the game.  Have I already lost?
Would W S8 be better than B R7?  janr: yes, one should always try to play ko threats that do not lose points.
I think this has little (or no) meaning.  W is already alive in the O5 area, so there is no point in trying to reduce eyespace.  Instead, I really want to try something at the top.  Maybe it's too late for me to get in there, though.  janr: it is true that the game move does not earn many points.  The top is relatively secure white territory.  When in doubt, take the ko.
janr: the ko gets more and more direct while black does not gain much.
janr: black should take the ko and not waste threats
I think this also has no meaning, since w is already alive in the O5 area.
At this point, I ran out of time (this was a relatively fast game).  But I still think I'm pretty far behind with the top left being as it is...    What are the general concepts and ideas that I am missing that may be evident in this game?    janr: the guidelines of the Go Teaching Ladder suggest you submit for review 'slow' games.  It makes more sense to comment on moves you thought about than to comment random moves.  janr: I think it is important for black to pay attention to shape.  Avoid bad shape, even if it's not immediately clear why it will give a bad result.    Thank you again for your help!
-- in my view, all the moves are ok so far
-- This might be a bit too defensive. By now, White has gained substantial influence not only towards the left and lower edge, but also towards the centre by the marked stones. Black could invade at A or B, for example, thus reducing White's influence or future territory.
Should I have pushed white toward the side, or continued pushing him toward the center?  -- closing the corner with this move (R15) is correct. White's stone on the forth line aims at the center.
-- bad shape for White
--This move should be on A! White is not in a position to hane here, since the 2-Stone-Group has a Black stone at its head.
-- this is too defensive a move! Better attack White, at A for example, or tenuki and play in the lower left
-- Compare with the variant starting at move 37
-- what is this move meant to do? Black cannot surround White. Instead, you should try an reduce the White territory on the left and on the lower edge.  What about A, B or C?
-- the only thing left to do is to jump into the corner now! If Black cannot establish a position in the lower left quadrant of the board, he won't be able to win.
-- If you want to play a double hane (diagonal move), you should beforehand know what you do, especially how to deal with the atari White will be giving on A or B!
-- i would rather play on A, in order to strengthen the three black stones on the left..
-- no need to cover the gap.Instead, play at A finally, or B
Could I have made a better move? I tryed to discourage white from playing in my territory with that move. It evidently worked, but I'm not sure if it work against a more skilled player.  -- I cannot imagine how to create a living white group here, so I think there was no need for playing here. As mentioned before, jumping into the corner at A is crucial, and could have turned this game to black victory!
-- as White did guess correctly...
Same as move 115.  -- yes; here I am not quite sure, but probably White could not have come to live here either (see variations for move 97)
Should I have passed instead, or was there a better move?  -- no, there was no better move here
-- no, this stone should be on A!
crux: Uncommon, as an extension in front of the shimari is typically more valuable.  It does occur in pro play, though.
crux: Could consider just playing A instead.  White's corner will be secure and Black's stones slightly weakened.
crux: Could consider tenuki.  The hane prevents a 3-3 invasion even without the connection.
I have the feeling that I must invade the lower area now or it will be too late  crux: The top seems wider.
crux: Really bad.
crux: Black seems to have lots of shape weaknesses.  The question is how best to exploit them.
crux: Essentially, this is pushing from behind.  Probably better to connect to the right side now.
crux: Nice leaning attack.
crux: Leaves a weakness at A.  Paradoxically, B may be a stronger connection. If White thinks he can live on the right side, C is a very important point for the balance of power.
crux: It was rather good for Black to get those last two moves.
Is this move a waste?  crux: Mostly.  A weakness remains even after this move (which Black later kind of tries to exploit).  Also, the cut at A may be better.
I think this is small  crux: There appears to be a black center moyo, and the move devalues the area in front of your shimari.  I don't think it's too bad.
I am thinking that I can chase him and destroy his center left moyo
crux: You're attacking from the strong side, and Black can just jump out.  How about A?
but he senses this and protects
So I go after teh upper side which is big, too.
I have to be careful here.  Not sure if jumping or going into the corner is better, and why.  crux: A and B seem sort of miai to settle the single white stone, so how about playing the large turn at C first?
smaller than R16,  I think.
crux: This one I'd play at A, which looks forward to the hane at B later.
very small I think
miai to capture one of 2 small groups.
crux: "Force before defending" would suggest to play A first (and possibly moves around B); these might no longer be quite as sente after White connects the ko.  I think (without being 100% sure), that capturing at C lives locally, and may be another option that's bigger than just connecting the ko.
Do you see maybe one big yose mistake from here on out?  crux: Here, instead of the game move, the peep at A is kind of interesting.
crux: This needs to be at A, to threaten a jump at B.
crux: That looks like a nice double sente point (i.e. you should have got there earlier).
crux: Don't like this very much.  A is probably bigger.
crux: Looks like White got the move order wrong.
Perhaps I should have gone R3, but I didn't think about it at the time.  Mattias> This is good. Sometimes one wants to develop the stones quickly and get control over larger parts of the board.
Mattias> Black is stronger and will get the better result.
Perhaps R14 better.
I meant to keep him cut, but perhaps this move was too early. C17 better?  Mattias> Do not be in a rush. Mind the corners first and when you are strong, you attack! C17 is a good start.
Mattias> I think it would be better to play diagonal at G15.
Mattias> A bit too agressive. Your stones are not that strong yet.  Well... there is this proverb "Cut first, think later". But don't take it litterally. Maybe it should be "Always think about the cutting move".
Misread.
Too small? But he responded anyways.  Mattias> Hmmm... not so small. White is not yet secure.
Pincer worked out for white.
This stone should have been at D3 or F3.
Mattias> A bit too agressive again. You are not that strong in the area.
White's mistake.
B4 better?  Mattias> Yes I think so.
Mattias> So small of white.
P3 better?
Too close?  Mattias> O4 would be better.
Mattias> Already connected.
Mattias> So small... zero points...
Mattias> This is big. Some other big points marked.
Mattias> These two stones are not so important right now. Would it not be nicer to cut at N15 after the ignored threat? Are you playing blitz?
Mattias> Whites misstake... should have been at L13
Mattias> Good
Mattias> Why not M7?
pumading [12k]: hi gg pumading [12k]: from germany
TrueOrgan: In this situation I would not recommend E17 since this might help white settle.  If you do decide to make some kind of kick like this, you should be in a position where you already have a stone around c14 and can pincer immediately as in the variation.  Alcibaides [16k]: America
TrueOrgan: The problem with this is the weakness at C17... (check variations)
Stephen: > Move 8, should I have instead moved somewhere worth more points like > claiming a star point on the side or fanning out the corner at R 14 > like I did on his first approach?  TrueOrgan: I don't particularly like either of your methods, I explained why I don't like the first one earlier.
TrueOrgan: I don't like your position here since you need another stone around r14 to complete your corner.  Otherwise a move at Q15 or R14 can hurt a lot.
Stephen: I don’t know what I was thinking, it just felt instinctive > to attack while I had him pinned elsewhere, given a second chance, I > would have played C 10 or  R 10  TrueOrgan: Those are indeed better moves.  I think the most urgent move though, would be to help H3 by giving him a base. L3 is possible.
TrueOrgan: Running with this stone only helps white, you should rather atari from the outside and use the bad potential to gain more on the left side. (check variation)
TrueOrgan: This is why a base for the H3 stone is important, a pincer around L3 is even more dangerous for you.
Stephen: I should have let this battle go shouldn’t I? I wanted to > go ahead and finish off and expand this corner but I think instead I > should have played a bigger point  TrueOrgan: Yes, these stones are not so important.  If you want to attack them, a looser move would be more appropriate, such as D9 or F6.
TrueOrgan: White has gained immensely from you abandoning the H3 stone.
TrueOrgan: Careful...
TrueOrgan: Now your unfinished corner is costing you.
Stephen: yes I know I should have just gone to S 19, captured, and > put the group on Atari; for some reason this move was just dumb > enough to startle me
TrueOrgan: Now white has made perfect shape with this iron pillar (F16 and F17) that you forced him to make.
Stephen: I think I must have gotten bored or something, I should > have pushed outward on the right side of the board towards the > middle with that group  TrueOrgan:  Yes, getting bored will decrease your strength.
Stephen: Instead of capturing, should I have run with this group > until I ran out of room and destroyed some of his territory, I > allowed him to wall off quite a bit of territory by capturing
TrueOrgan: Perfect shape again...
TrueOrgan: You are VERY lucky here.
Stephen: I should have kept moving out towards the center here, it > is obvious he didn’t intend to cut with his response to my last > move, I could have made a bigger territory but allowed him to cut me > off with this backtracking
Stephen: I make these knights moves quite a bit when I am > trying to wall off territory, is this the most effective way?  TrueOrgan: It is fast, but you should beware of being cut.
TrueOrgan: Classic tesuji, be careful of this one.
White can also make a quite big ko by playing s6 or something.
Stephen: starts the most tense ko battle I’ve ever been in, I would > like your comments generally on this, by move 138 he knows I intend > to capture not survive  TrueOrgan: You are extremely lucky that white gave you a chance at all.
TrueOrgan: White is quite greedy to play here and not H1.
TrueOrgan: The ko hasn't started yet, so white should probably not R2, but block at N3 to not waste any threats.
Alcibaides [16k]: wow this is tense
Stephen: should I have gone elsewhere? I > felt the need to answer his threat at R 2 and had nowhere else I > could think to go  TrueOrgan: Looks OK to me.  White wasted his threat.
Stephen: I capture and end it, did I do right to > end it or should I have answered the threat in my corner? I think I > did right but sometimes I capture stones that are already dead so I > want to double check…  TrueOrgan: I think you have to capture, it is definitely the biggest thing on the board.
TrueOrgan: Here however... Saving S7 was a BAD idea.
Stephen: I should have connected at R 3 shouldn’t I? How would you > have minimized this damage? I lost virtually everything here; was > winning the big ko battle even worth losing this corner? > > I missed a capture at E 14 that would have gained an extra > point;  TrueOrgan: Yeah, this is a weird move. Connecting is better for sure.  The best I can see though, is S2 instead of Q2.  (END OF COMMENTS)
TrueOrgan: Ouch!
This move does follow basic opening principals As per Yilun Yang 's book (http://www.slateandshell.com/libraryprod.asp?SSKey=SSYY006)  That said, in this particular position it is a little wierd. The triangles are normal developments for this corner, which you will note are toward's your opponent's stones. It would be nicer to have all 3 of your stones working together.   Variations show the more common openings
Very territorial, and you have made your side of the board hard to develop because both stones are low. This defiately leads to an early lead in territory, but makes future development  difficult.
Low and seems slightly slow. No pressure on white here.
White's stones are all working together. If black had this formation it would be a nearly ideal development of the Chinese Fuseki. The difference is it is your turn, so things are still not too far from even, but I feel like white is developing better.
Given that this is the same shape as the chinese fuseki, the same rules about invasion apply. This invasion point is exactly what white wants  Virtually any book on the chinese opening would be good to read. One (out of print) book that I like is "The Chinese Opening: a sure win strategy" by Kato Masao, but if you can't find that any book that deals with the chinese opening would be good to get. It's very common and pretty dangerous when one person knows it and the other doesn't.
A shame to be touching w's stone.  Gives W strength that works with d4
W now has almost 30 prospective points at the top, almost equal to your two corners. However this move still seems a bit slow.
Why play d6 if you are going to abandon it?
w can avoid strengthening black by not playing closely here
this double hane is a mistake by w. Looks cool, and nothing dies, but it gives black free moves in the center.
Because b is incontrol of the center this is a difficult move for w. What W played gives you something to attack as you noted. The primary problem for W is that W must reduce the center in sente and somehow come back to protect agains black C3. Black is stable all over and w is all alone. There is almost no chance of W ending in sente if black is careful  From here on I will mark every move that I think could have been played at C3. This is because the invasion is sooooo big that you really must remember it.
seems slow
[ekberg] leaning attack on the r12 group  Seems a bit agressive, but building thickness to ataack is a reasonable idea. see Vars for more normal varioations
W has lost focus. The key issue is the weak group in the center and the invasion at c3. This move doesn't actually work either.
Too soft. I'm pretty sure you can kill the w invader.
not necessary.  Doesn't fix your weekness and you would be thankful for a w play at p17 allowing you to create a solid wall.
[ekberg]: Could you please comment my attack? Should I go for kill, or just (as I did) build up a moyo?  The w stones are not easy to catch. and you have a Weakness at p15. I would be surprised if you can kill
w helping you here say thankyou
Soft you can be more agressive here
too lose by w
This doesn't threaten the w stones in any way
[ekberg] My tries to count gave fairly equal result and called for good endgame rather than spectacular invasions. Was I too optimistic, or did my endgame just stink?  Actually your counting needs work. There is still an invasion at c3, and while I think dan level players can force it into a ko when d6 isn't there there's a very good chance your opponent won't, and the effect of d6 might even stop that (this is beyond my ability to be certain). However, given that it is entirely inside w's prospective territory the ko would still be a loss for w.  Generally when I count I start by ONLY counting the points that are 100% guaranteed (assuming a normal local response). I've converted to circles all the points I feel are still in question. After counting the solid points check for any string of strong sente plays that would radically change the score. If you don't see them, then its likely that you and your oponent will split the difference on the remaining points.  So if you do invade I count you as ahead by a fair margin. This assumes that W is too timid, or not skilled enough to pull off a coresponding invasion at A, which is probably not feasible against dan level players, who will force W into the center where B is already powerful, but in kyu play it can still happen that A succeeds when it shouldn't.  I see 66 solid w points + 6.5 komi and 74 solid B points. (again assuming your opponent doesn't swindle you with A). The net result is that you made about as many errors for yourself as for your opponent when counting, so you got a good assesment, but the problem is The invasion at c3 is not optimistic. It's profitable, and required for the real score  :) jump to the end and count the territory you got in the center
[ekberg] Should I go for c3 here or continue the attack?
This is the mistake. You are inviting W to hit you on the head.
[ekberg] maybe it was a mistake to save these two stones? I intended to keep the w group weak, but that made my wall weak as well.
This is where w wins the game. now you can't invade.
[ekberg] maybe I was chicken, but I believed linking the two weakish groups together would be more important than the big play around g3.  yeah you're chicken :) W can't kill either group until saving this. If you're worried, do something sente to fix one of them...
[ekberg] a kibitzer said: "black chickens out with l16? :)" What would be better?
and see now you are connected twice, at least one of them is a waste.
Not sure why W responds here.
Not quite sure what you are going for here.
W didn't need to respond here
W mistake
matane11 [2d]: hi
Donal: Both players are playing fine moves through White 10. Personally, I would have played a pincer instead of black 5, but it is hard to say that 5 was a bad move.  However with 11, Black is clearly overconcentrated. Since he has such a solid formation in the corner, he should play at A, or on the left side of the board.
The purpose of black 15 was presumably to attack White and gain a profit, but if anything it is White who seems to have profited. Black needed to find a stronger play instead of 15. (see diagram)
Again, I would have chosen a pincer here instead of the attachment of white 18. A pincer works well with the white stone on the star point at the lower left. Black 23 erases the power of the star point.  This is largely a matter of style, but especially in this game the pincer works well with the White stones in the center. (see diagram)
a severe move. maybe i should have play m4 instead of d15 ?  Donal: Of course black 11 would have been better if it was one space to the left. But at this point it is too slow to play at A (see diagram).  Also White 24 is somewhat of an overplay (see diagram).
White 32 and 34 are thin, leaving an invasion at 36. Black should have played there instead of 35.
White can live here, but it's too early now (see diagram).
what about A instead ?  Donal: I would expect the result to be exactly the same in either case.. White will give up three stones and sea off the center.
54 is poor. A is better.
White ends in gote either way, but he now has cuts that he wouldn't have if he had played correctly.
maybe i should have waited to play the ko ?  Donal: Playing here now is big, but you can kill White unconditionally (see diagram). I can't read the rest of your game record, so my comments end here.
i won nothing with this ko
a blunder
oups :)
trying to reduce the white framework while enlarging black's one
What is that?? What is the best way to deal with it? Maybe my alt path?  Mans - see my variations for some comments
Mans - I don't like your response. You are opening up for him to attack underneatch at E2 or F2 or attack on the other side at K2
Mans - I don't like this move. You are vulnerable again and giving him opportunity to build strength and territory
Mans - after this move he has a strong territory on fourth line and you have agroup of stones hanging in the middle. He can still attack on F2 or K2 or K3
Mans - I think you want to safe up the bottom part of the board by this, but it is actually still open for attacks. and it is a bit overcrowded on the bottom side after that move. Look at my variation.
Is there a better move here? Maybe 16R? or even14R?  Mans - This move is perfectly fine. R16 works, but puts no pressure on him. R14 does not really work. Now you have him neatly fined and can put a lot of pressure on his R13 and R10 group
To far? To high?  Mans - maybe a bit wild. You are not really defending the upper right corner with that move. If that is your goal, it is too far and too high. He can attack the corner with a number of moves. But you don't have to defend the upper right corner, so it works.
Maybe k14 first then f17 or what?  Mans - I think this works, but you have to be careful about having too many loose and vulnerable stones on the board. Especially if you are not confident you can defend them correctly. Maybe focus on building more safe territory
There is that funny corner move again!  Mans - as you can see he is building terrirory in this corner safely while pushing your lonely stones. I guess your next move came out of desperation to make sure it didn't develop the same way as the other corner. Look at my simple variation.
Mans - atfer this move your stone have nothing. No base along the edge and open to attack from C8
was there something better?  Mans - seriously you have almost lost the game after this exchange. C13 was probably needed, but as you can see, he has secured a very large are in the top left corner, and you have a lot of stones hanging in the middle that doesn't give you any territory. and it is his move to do anything he likes now.  A move like attacking and building with C9 like he did
Mans - this move is pushing him towards attacking your still unsecure big group around the left side, which he does. Don't push him towards your weak stones. As a general rule in go you only push opponents towards your strong groups. See my variation.
yes and now watch me loose the whole side!!
Mans - this stone is not neccessary. It is too protective.
and loose the corner too! 2 winds yikes!
Mans - I think this is too passive, even though I like the fact that you are now safe. See variation
Mans - I sort of see what you are trying to do here, at least secure some territory so he won't invade this as well. However, if you look at the whole board you notice that you are already in trouble. He has secured a lot of territory and has no huge vulnerable situations, but you have. So it will be tough to recover. But if you really want to, you need to attack his last weaknesses and build safe territory while doing so. See variation.
Mans - here you are lucky white doesn't go for F2.
Mans - This is too defensive. You get caught defending stones that does not build territory and he keeps attacking you. This gave white the time to play his next move which defends his stomnes in the middle of the board.
At least the shape lives.
Mans - this is too slow. See variation.
Hey, I wanted to go there!  Mans - yes, he keeps pushing and you keep defending. You need to find moves that both attack his weaknesses and strengthen your own weaknesses.
Mans - this move is too small. If you want to win you have to think big :) Build a huge territory in the top right or bottom right.
Yet down goes then next corner! :-(
Mans - this is your mistake. You need to defend you top right corner. See variation
Mans - after this move you are dead in the corner and he definitely won the game
Mans, this is not the move. The corner is his. Just go with O16 or Q11
Mans - this is  forcing him to make the Q10 move which is bad for you, since you need to defend the R12/R11 stones.
Mans - this move is not the one to make. It lead to you losing the whole group. See variation
That p14 group had no right to die! What went wrong?
Mans - this is too passive, should be S7
Mans - this is too small. If you want that white stone a move at L10 would have the same effect. But your last chance to win the game is to build a huge bottom right corner. See variation
Mans - this is not needed. P9 is the move
Mans - this is not the move either. You can stop him from connecting. See variation
Game over but I think the fighting went ok to the end.  Mans - Yes I agree. He has too much territory so you can't win now. I will give less advice going forward, basically only comment on pure errors.
Odif: both the black stone and the white stone wish to develop in the direction of A Equally ,the white stone likes to develop in the direction of B The point at C is only the secondary direction of the black stone
Odif: I would never play like this, I can't say that its bad though, maybe just a question of style.
Odif: This move is bad
Odif: Wrong direction
Odif:Black jumps into the fire. I don't like the whole idea behind this move. In the sequence that follows, black solidifies his lower side and gets a lot in the bottom right, while black gets a small live group, white is doing well. also, this stone is cut off from its friends and so it can play no part in a consistent stategy.
Odif: I dont like these last two moves  A move like p4 is played when you want to cut, besides this makes bad shape, the empty triangle
Odif: this stone is too close to the marked stones, it is inefficient, L 17 or L 16 looks better
Odif: again bad approach move
Odif: The squared group gets good shape, compare it to the shape of the triangled group.
Odif: if black had a stone at the marked point, it could aid him in the fight here
Odif: too defensive
Odif: overplay
Odif: the wrong point,
Odif: this leaves a weakness at d5
Odif: W can still get a ko see variation
[F]: Of course you can play c15 to do the normal joseki, but splitting is not a bad idea.  The difficulty would be to find the right spot.  Your move is not bad, but I think you could have followed it up a little better.  See variation from move 13.   A: This looked to me a bit too far from D15, so I decided to try and take advantage by splitting the two stones.
A: Here I was afraid to push again at H16, because of Black E11. This is fact made me think again of D12 was correct in the first place.
[F]: This is a strange move for W.  It forces B to settle the c10 stone and doesnt really attack the top f15 stones.
[F]: I think the problem here was E11.  That move did not do anything to help.  It is difficult for W here.  B should play F13 here.  A: Is this play good? I am no so sure...
[F]: Maybe you should just leave the area.
A: I spent a lot of time before making this play, thinking that I can get along with the cut - but I was wrong.
A: Quite a disaster...Now I realized that Black has miai of J14 and L17.
A: Oops! Black mistake.. Should of course capture J15 in a ladder.
[F]: If I were B, I would play 3-3 first.  A: This looks to me like to only direction.
A: Any comment on this sequence? I think hat cannot complain for getting central thickness although Black got some points on the left.
[F]: B is alive - stop following him.  Play something big like 3-3.
[F]: Unnecessary.  Do you really think you can kill that group?  A: This was to prevent linking with F15 group.
[F]: I think so too.  A: It felt too deep to me.
A: I was satisfied with capturing. Also Black centered is unsetlled.
A: This play looked strange to me; I thought may be it a ladder breaker or somthing. Only later I realized Black is building a huge moyo.
A: Intended to capture the two balck stones on wide scale, also threaten invasion on the lower right corner.
A: Now I begin to understand... So I have to reduce Black's space - but apparently I have picked to wrong side.
[F]: This is not a good place to start.....
[F] B should tenuki here to play something bigger.
A: It was painful to end in gote.
A: Black secured huge territory - almost 100 points. The only I hope was to capture Black's stones in the center. Your comments on the race here are most welcome.
A: I am doing my best to prevent Black from securing a second eye beyond the one he secured on the corner, but it seems that White's framework is too thin.
A: My only hope is to live here and then Black will probably die - but Black has more liberties so the game is decided.  Thanks a lot for your help!
here this move usually confuses me ,  since i am not sure how to react to it , so im thinking to play a move at lower left corner and later aproach upper left corner (approaching the top left corner now is probably not a good idea)  df: taking the lower left is good.  Just be aware that this move intends to make a wall facing right on the upper edge, so play yor openeing to make that wall small.
i probably should've played D4 here , since that way it would be easier to approach top left corner.  df: this is fine too.
this move confused me too , i was not sure now what would be my next move , what is the biggest point right now? should i just defend the corner,pincer or take the other corner  df: I would just take the last corner.  This more is not close to your corner, so you don't have to answer it.  Generally the corners are bigger, so you should take a corner unless you have a really good reason not to.
df: since he played a nonstandard move, you should think about which joseki will arise after your move (with a different move order).  Playing on 4-4 gives him a double approach to your corner, which is good for him.  Other moves transpose into more advantagous joseki.
df: I like coming out and separating white.  if he comes in at 3-3, you can choose the direction and make some thickness facing your 4-4 stone.  this is good for you, since your stone on the lower side won't get in too much trouble.  Taking the corner yourself will give white a lot of outside thickness.  If white gets thick, your 4-4 point stone is damaged.  You started at 4-4.  This means you want to play long extensions on the adjacent edges, and play for thickness or a moyo.  His move in the upper left limits the upper side.  When yuo let him get the outside in the lwoer right, it limits the right side.
i think p 5 or any other move here would make the situation good for W , so i went for the corner teritory.  df: I would come out and take the right edge, to be consistent with your 4-4 opening.
defending my weak stone and seperating W's two groups.
pincer heredoesnt seems big to me so i just defended.  df: this is ok, but be aware that white will immediately get a big framework on the upper edge.
df: this helps white make a big upper side, so you should think about the other approach.
df: this helps white make a perfect wall on the upper side.  You should consider the alternative.
df: this white move is slow, so you have a chance now to counter this wall.
was my move the biggest?  i thought about invading top , since it can become huge if W plays move like "a" , and if he does it will be dificult to reduce it.  i also thought about playing at "a" myself but wasnt sure if it's big enough .  what would you have done here?  df: I like your move.  If you don't play here, white will make his wall even longer.  If you build some thickness here, you can attack the F4 stone.  O15 looks small.  If you had a framework of your own on the right side, o15 would be on the junction, expanding yours and reducing his.  But you do not have a framework, so O15 does nothing for you.  If yuo want to reduce his side I would start at J14 or K14.
now i have no choice but to try and reduce his top.  df: if you can capture the F4 stone your territory competes well with his upper side, but it's difficult.  If he lives and you get thick around H6, you can attack the lower right stones to move into the center, and reduce his upper side while attacking. I would look for some more active alternative to your reducing move, since it is a small reduction, and he doesn't have to answer it.  capturing this stone is unlikely, but getting some outside thickness and making it live small is still good.  Your attack should end with you sente, so you can still reduce later.
this move tells me my corner could be in trouble , also he might conect or use somehow my aji at triangle area.
instead of defending my corner i try to surround his stones, cut him from his allied stones (i think if i just defend it would be too passive)  df: good
is F3 better? i played j4 because i wanted to attack later the group on the right so my thought is that this move might help me later.
df: this looks like an overplay since you corner is weak.
df: this is bad result in the corner since your group can be killed and white is out and solid.
df: you need another move in the corner.
this move was probably mistake (had no time to read it out)
fortunately W didnt read it out either and he gave me the chance to fix my mistake and save my stone (the stone itself is not important but it does helps me reduce his center)
my first mistake here is that i didnt answered by playing at a2 or b2 , my second mistake is that i didnt saw this group is dead (usually i defend weak groups in time) this game i was probably too busy thinking about his center teritory.  df: the group is just as dead after a2 or b2.  since the group is dead already you should save these moves for ko threats.
looking on it now this move is really small , should've probably attacked the W group on the right.  df: no, this move is really big. since it makes you thick in the center.  Earlier white gave you territory for a wall, and now you have eliminated the influence of that wall.
df: capturing white's wall makes up for losing the lower left. You have caught up.
df: the game is close now, so you just need to play well in the endgame.
is this move ok? i didnt saw better move locally , except perhaps something like R18.  what would you have done on top?
df: this doesn't look right.  it is much easier for white to come into the center from the top, since the gap is wider and your adjacent groups are weaker.  This move should be at the top.
df: you should try not to answer white everywhere in the endgame. He keeps picking up points in sente.  Try to counter his move with a move of similar size elsewhere to keep the balance.
df: b18 is really large.  If you can find a way to play here in sente then go b18, or just play there now, it might be better. A move around here is pretty big too though.
df: this seems to give white points
Probably should have just responded at Q12.  I take territory and O14 is overconcentrated.  R: Agree, black can severely attack the upper side and his previously overconcentrated stones become good stronghold for killing/surrounding. However its a handicap game :)
R: I think this exchange good for black. bottom left corner hardly can be killed by one move, but upper right seems to be territory if black make one more move.
R: Black is very co...err.. cautious :)
R: second line seems to be small in this stage. Extending the moyo or invasion would be more important.
I chose this side because the bottom left is reduceable at F2.
This looks awkward and low, but I think I let him get too much here.  Variations for responding to this would be appreciated.  R: Black primary goal here would be to create "sabaki" (group of losely connected stones what can live or escape). I feel so that this stone can be completely destroyed with the outer strength, but it is extremely difficult.  White is ok, so  best option is to press that low position to more and more lower:)
Too loose I think. R: I agree
Is there a better invasion here?  This really solidifies black's moyo at the top.  Not so good.  R: san-san is easy and safe solution. An invasion at F16 or even F17 is still possible however.
I'd also appreciate advice around this sequence here.  I thought I could kill black here...  R: I think it would be very hard if not imposibble to kill black without secrifice. Nevertheless i would play H10 here to kill...
R: If you want to kill, you *must* prtect your cutting stones. see var.
Decided to sacrifice G11 because I've realized I can't kill black like this.  R: good thought, but you should have started before :)
This looks a little unreasonable, but I'm giving stones so I thought I'd give it a shot.  R: Yeah it is. :)
I was seeking to avoid complications that might appear if I attached at O10, but this feels submissive to me in retrospect.  R: A dont think attach at O10 is good. Black will break througt.
R:  very strange move from black. gote -1 pont at least. F2 might turn the match
Wrong side.  Still have a weakness at G8.  Maybe?  R: Maybe :) If there is a weakness I cant see. However after F5 and E6 white should deffend. yep.   anyway, some sente moves at L3, Q3, T2 seems to be better.
Didn't notice the descent at K1 was sente.  R: in fact you can play C12 as it is sente too.
R: As some hungarian 6dan says: When you feel you need to connect, connect :) (dont try to make some strange sahpes)
R: ? :)
oyano [2k]: Hallo
rs220675: I figured I can play tenuki here for a faster development. Is it possible?  * Yes it is.
rs220675: Moves like this puzzle me always esp. when played in the fuseki. Should I react and attack the stone right now or let it be there for the first and attack it later?  * Attacking the upper group was a good idea, but you you should be aware that D4 and D6 aren't very strong either.
rs220675: Is this the right move for white?  * This move makes it easy for black to separate your groups. A may be better.
* There is no need to play this move. A or B instead looks better.
rs220675: Is the sequenze up to now ok for white?  * It is better to connect at H15.
rs220675: Is this the right move or should I have reacted around D4?  * You should answer C3 because the two stones are getting weak now.
rs220675: 1. I have no idea if this is joseki or if even this sequence is good for white. 2. Can one play tenuki after O4 or is there one more move urgent?  * Black can tenuki but the hane at Q6 seems to be very strong. This is why I would play Q6 as White instead of O4.
rs220675: Here again a move, I can't understand what to do. See my answer and please tell me if it's good or if there are better answer to this invasion. I tried to kill the stone and save my territoy plus avoiding the serparation of O17, O15.  * I think A is possible. But now the H15 aji can may become annoying. Your move is ok, too.
rs220675: I think I messed up the sequence or did I get the best out of it? * I don't think it is very bad for White.
rs220675: I figured the game still open at this point. The black stone at D8 should be mineand the territory around too. Please tell me where I did the mistakes in the following fight for this territory resp. esape of the black stones.  * I don't think you can say that D8 is dead. It can still escape especially because White is thin around H10. Thus a move to capture D8 is probably bigger than C4.
* This move leaves a weakness at F11. A is better.
* A should work.
You should defend at A, now.
rs220675: Now the game was quite over, I resigned after some couple of desperation moves. You can stop here and thx again for your review.
mafu: this move is cool how should black answer?
mafu: my ideas here: white A is too far B is the game move C is probably bad because it leaves a weakness at A later and black runs ahead D is probably best for white  T: VERY difficult decision. also for me ;-). wc9 and bc11 are both very interesting! i would prefer A or D now.
T: I think the result is ok for black. both sides have a shimari but the black group looks stronger than the white one because it's directed to the center.  but no need to worry for white. the game is still about equal.
T: usually d7 is played as a checking move. you don't really want to cut now because white seperates the 3 upper stones as it happened in the game. just play elsewhere, maybe later the cut becomes a good move.
mafu: this result seems fine as well the 3 black stones are useless now
T: i think this decision is good because it helps to weaken the black influence on the left.
T: in this joseki, usually black has 2 possibilities. A or B. If you play A, you should answer the checking extension R11 with jumping to the center. You found out yourself in the game i think. So if you don't want to answer there, you should take B.
mafu: this move is sente, but black has no time to answer :(  T: that's why you should better have chosen the smaller extension on R8. If you have to come back now, maybe o17 (instead of o16) would have been better on the upper side.
T: with this move you weaken your righter side group. black should simply push through.
mafu: this looks weird difficult fight :x  T: he peeps himself ^^ usually bad. also in this situation
T: good move! if black tries to save that black stone, his corner will probably collapse.
Mandos: white with strange shape
mafu: stupid b misreads r16 xD
mafu: white happy ^_^  T:  black must answer! otherwise...
mafu: is this the correct spot to invade?  T: don't invade yet!
T: even if you live in the corner the upper white side becomes too big and your 3 black stones on the left become very weak.
Mandos: misread
mafu: maybe white a little bit too far
mafu: i found no better move, so i invaded
mafu: this move is strong i thought black dies ^^  T: don't worry. the gap between the white stones is too big to kill you!
mafu: emergency plan  T: good move!
T: well... looks too heavy and weakens your black territory on the right.
T: still better A
T: this is overplay. you should jump out with A or something.
T: now you see the triangled stone was senseless.
mafu: aji keshi? i wanted to make white more heavy i am not sure if it is good
T: this whole sequence looks like you cannot decide on wich side to play. i also think especially this move is not good because it weakens your 3 stones on the left.
mafu: this move was so cool i did not see this black is in trouble :(
Mandos: i didnt see this move
White resigns.
C: Right, is weird. You could lead the game to a normal state playing around Q4
C: bigger in F16
C: again, hane
C: see the variant
C: hane, not always but near the edge is right almost all times
C: In this moment R5 is very big and important
C: in this point is hard for white
PM:  Black seems to control huge areas of the board now
PM:  I was glad I was able to spoil some of black's territory here, but I really needed to reduce black's western group, I just couldn't figure out how.
C: see the option
C: just connect
PM:  Better response?  Black snatched the corner back handily here.  C: for lose less points see the option
C: not necessary in this moment
>> most of the time white should prevent black framework with A
>> I'd prefer A to d2 because if I was white I'd likely ignore this move and play around r12.  C6 is low so It's reasonably secure
so far anything to say about the opening?  >> I think that Q10 might be bigger than D2 >> J4 is not a shape move, it should be H4 or J3 but in this case it is probably OK because black has O3, R4 formation.
>> I told you about Q10 earlier because of this white move.
is q12 proper? any other choices? or shouldn't i let this happen?  >> you can play from below to solidify your bottom area
>> strange play, it's better to extend below to upset black's potential territory
white seems to be better off...
any other options to c14?  >> this is ok but you should worry about q11 cut too
this looks like a nice move to me - extentions from the wall + reducing  >> don't try to make area from the wall too much, white has a cut at Q11 that you should keep in mind. Personally I think you can build bottom moyo instead, it certainly looks bigger
how about that? wanted to threaten a cut-off  >> white is fine here,  K14 did the job of forcing white to answer so you should turn to your bottom framwork.  Next couple of moves are almost pointless by both players.
to deep by white, right?  looks like it but it probably lives
i thought offensive play should be proper here, or is killing noch obligatory?  >> probably just let it live small
>>.A might just do the trick of blocking white
white looks quite desperate so far, but...
i missed some moves to finish the catch....  >>with black center, it is close enough to play good endgame.  so you might let white live in gote.
>>black is  not strong enough outside to kill like this.
b realized to late that g7 is dead
mistake by w
>> strange endgame move,  this shape you can do B12, see my variation.
i thought there is still possible to catch up a little
>> why didn't you capture..?
antything to say about the endgame?
Blue: What was up with this move? Is it just plain bad? And in general, if my opponent makes apparently bad moves i nthe early game, should I be trying to take advantage or just ignoring them and making good moves?  crazyd:  Yes - it looks bad to me.  If some obvious way to punish your opponent occurs to you, then it might be okay to play immediately.  Usually, unless they have a one-move fix, then there will be choices and it is best to save choices until you know which is best.
Blue: I dislike this move. What would have been better? Is killing or containing those two stones actually important?  crazyd:  Maybe tenuki and if they choose to run you have a target to exploit
crazyd:  J15 looks much better as it encloses white rather than helping white run out.
crazyd:  Perhaps the white stones are high because the player is high.  Should be an easy game for black.
Blue: How does one play from here? I pincered because I could and I understand it to be good, but I don't really know the followups.
crazyd:  An alternative would be to play C3 and you will link up to one side, but this looks fine for black.
crazyd:  D6 looks small.  The F3-K4 is bigger in this quadrant, and upper and lower right areas of the board are also hot areas.
crazyd:  Again, way too small for now.
Blue: As you can see later, this cut was not successful. Could it have been?  crazyd:  Locally J3 secures life, but a move like G5 (threatening the cut) is also available.  The cut does not seem like a good idea at this time.
crazyd:  Your last two moves don't make sense to me.  Perhaps you are misreading sequences?  If so, doing life and death problems can help.
crazyd:  If white plays at D1 instead then your last few moves were wasted.  Your problems reading out sequences is becoming a theme of this game [not that your opponent is much better :)]
Blue: This didn't work, what could have? Or indeed should I be focusing on much bigger things?  crazyd:  J2 would have secured life (makes two eyes).
Blue: I've not seen this play (up to this point). What did I do wrong?  crazyd:  This is a joseki.
crazyd:  The white group at S2 has 4 liberties.  IQ2 occurs to you as a possibility, do you imagine white will do anything other than P2?  So black has two liberties and white has four.  Who will win that fight?
crazyd:  C10 instead of C9 prevents an atari at D11 - better shape for black.
Blue: Here an invasion starts which ultimately is successful. I feel it should not have been had I played correctly.Can you show me where my defense failed?
crazyd:  If black plays L17 there should be no hope for white to live in this quadrant.
crazyd:  This move, reducing your own liberties, is almost suicide.
crazyd:  White K18 (atari) takes the black K16 stones.
crazyd:  An example of white not reading.  M8 is fine for white.
Blue: Yeah, I missed it.
Blue: On a personal note, I'm proud of killing this.
Blue: This whole battle was entirely pointless.
crazyd:  I am sure you know what a snapback is.  If black plays P5 instead of taking one stone at T4, then all the white stones connected to P7 are dead.
Wrong side for the atari.Because with Q18 you chose the corner but this atari is from the wrong side.
[Markus]: Was the sequence from 16 til now right? I thought exchange upper side with corner was a good idea.  Reviewer: It is ok to take uppert part but then the previous strategy was wrong.
[Markus]: I don't realy know why I didn't play the alternative sequence, but I lost about 5 points here.  You saw your mistake but it seems it is more than 5 points.
[Markus]: Didn't watch out there, one big mistake.
You are very back at the game,so you have to try to kill some stones. And this one is a good opportunity.It may work with a KO.
I'll agree with this move from kefo. It gives a good chance of working with the stones in the top left, and so giving white a good side to work from in the rest of the game.
Black's moves are perfectly appropriate in this situation.
Too early! It's easy to see in hindsight, but white's stones at the bottom left are too open to attack. A move like C9, or even D8, would have settled those stones and given white a good chance at grabbing the entire left hand side.  I don't like to recite proverbs, but: "urgent moves before big moves" is just too appropriate here.
aranach - I thought white's wedge was a little early since he didn't have a base.  kefo - black stone here is painful to white.  ---  I agree with you both. This is extremely upsetting for white.  I'm not sure that white's move classes as a "wedge", though.
Not unreasonable play from white, here. If nothing else it puts a little pressure on the black stone and works with the top-right stones to mark out a nice chunk of territory.
Black's reponse is perfectly acceptable, although you could also consider D7 if you wanted to put more pressure on the marked stones. (Given the position of those, more pressure is always a good thing.)
This move doesn't really go anywhere. Black already has stones on either side. It's more important to try and give your stones a base. I would suggest B7 followed by B3.
aranach - I seem to have created a weak running group and now have to defend my bottom territory to keep it out of trouble.  ---  Black should be ecstatic with this result! White's got a very weak group that is having to run away, and that's presenting black with nice easy territory on the lower side.
Wrong place. White's not going anywhere with that little run out to the centre; and the further he goes, the more territory you're picking up along the bottom side. On top of that, white can easily break through that little capping move.
This shape is tempting because it defends both cutting points. Generally, though, I prefer to play a solid connection somewhere. In this case, probably at D3 rather than D2.  While it's not completely applicable in this situation, the shape made by the marked stones is both a source of ko threats and can lead to cramped shape if white chooses to peep.
aranach - Here I wanted to separate white into two groups and keep my groups connected.  ---  A bit keen. You've let white make a base on the edge, which is regrettable but we're here now and have to deal with it. So, from this situation I would be more tempted to jump out with the marked stones and make life independently whilst pressing down on white. See the variation.
aranach - I managed the cut, but now my group is in trouble. I hope to live over on the side by chasing a little, then putting pressure on white's corner group.  ---  I'd characterise this little fight as trying a little too hard. You tried so hard to cut a group that was reasonably well connected, and wasn't gaining much by being so, and ended up with your own weak and separated group.  You would have been better to lean on the stones or, as in the earlier variation, just push on top and make life independently. White wasn't gaining much by what he had, so there was no need to risk so much in cutting him.
kefo - bad, think e10 is better.  white was trying for everything but g8 stone is not important.
kefo - white shape is stupid  ---  You said it. I'd prefer to say "inelegant" or "cramped". :) We all do it.  In this situation, there's not a lot to be gained by the connection that you make. I'd play at G9 instead of G7. It makes white's outside more solid and gives you somewhere to run. The only thing that G7 does is upset people. :)
This fight is rather scrappy, but you both seemed to have fun.  This move, though, falls at the wrong point. I would leave it at this point and focus on connecting the white group out. By playing this moves, white forces black to take the stone at B7 and so removes any future potential that it might have.
aranach - I don't want white getting through underneath, I have one eye.
aranach - this lets me live on the side, my original goal, but at the cost of my cutting stones.  I'm unsure if this was the best move, but if I read the capture race that occurs if I play at e10 instead, I think I lose the b9 group.  White does not seem to make a lot of territory from all this either, so I am happy enough with the result.
aranach - I think maybe d11 would have been better, as white can now play there and push me down on the side while building a thick wall.  I played here because I didn't want the captured stone to cause trouble later and I could get out of atari that way.  kefo - seems black has about 40 points, white much less..  white d16 group not worth anything after black strength here.  the idea play white d11 - sorry it looks bad to me, think black just answer with d12.  idea to seal in black sounds good, but black can get in from top also, with f15 for example.  white was not happy here during the game, put so many stones on the left, and got nothing for them.  ---  With respect to this little exchange, black has done far better than white. White has made his group live, but in an ideal world would have been looking at the entire left side. Instead, black has made a good chunk of territory along the bottom, and destroyed white's side.  In a purely local sense, I quite like either E11 for black rather than this move. The stone that remains has some small potential, but it isn't worth such a solid defence.  In the sense of the overall board, though, there are far bigger points for black to play. F15 is absolutely huge, and there are points like R13, O17, R6 or O6 that are all much preferable to this.
Not unreasonable for white. A good chance to get the side away from black.
aranach - I played here with hope to protect the lower right corner and because a move on the left felt somewhat submissive.  I don't this this play was the best, but I am at a loss for what else to play. perhaps something like q6?  kefo - this makes the r10 stone on perfect spot, so maybe not strongest black play.  ---  kefo is right. This play by black just strengthens white. This move is played automatically by a lot of players and it's often just wrong!  A simple response at O3 or O4 would have worked to make the lower side a good chunk of territory for black, and would have left the opportunity to attack white.  At this point, black is looking to be quite ahead on territory, so doesn't need to be too jealous.  Of course, if you /really/ don't like this move then you can invade at R8. Take a look at "Get Strong at Invading" for more details.
aranach - I played here hoping to keep a high wall over toward the left. I think this move was part greed and part curiosity about what would happen and how white would respond.  kefo - thought this was interesting, but maybe too high since white group is safe.  white did not find best play after however.  ---  Well, you got to see some of the effects. :) Again, you are doing well in terms of territory, so a safer move is better.
kefo - think this is not best, p4 a try with this shape, or r3.
aranach - I appear to have invited white to jump into the territory I wanted, so I hoped to chase him out and live with the wedge of white stones as a lesson.
aranach - After getting to a point where I think I could have chased white out without too much damage, I got concerned about a huge white wall.  ---  In the situation, this is a little greedy. Just connect underneath and cut your losses.
aranach - I was almost ready to cede the whole corner at this point, as it was unclear to me how my corner stones would live. This at least let me keep the lower side.  ---  You let your stones be split, partially because you didn't want to lose a few more points earlier on. So you ended up fighting in two places at the same time. Always try to avoid being cut, and if it means sacrificing a few points earlier, it's better than lots of points later!
aranach - I was surprised to see white play this.  kefo - this was a poor result for white.  q5 instead simple.
aranach - I had a hope I could trade the o5 stones for life in the corner by threatening white's p4 group.  ---  It's worth a try. :)  The black stones at O5 aren't much of a threat, so I would have expected white to kill at R2.
kefo - white play on r2 is fine.  ---  I agree.
aranach - I was surprised to see white take these stones before being forced to.  ---  It's like Christmas. :)  Yes. White had much better things to do. I would personally have left the black stones alone and played somewhere like R14 or F15. I've had a play, and I can't see an easy way to kill them. I might regret it in a real game, though. :)  It hurts to play, but C14/C13 is quite urgent for white.
aranach - I'm pretty sure this makes life, but I'm not sure if it's the best way to.  kefo - think s2 also ok.  ---  If you felt you needed it, of course it's best to play there.
kefo - useless play.  ---  Given the state of the board, there's nothing here to gain for white.
kefo - this does not keep black in, white can try l7 instead.
kefo - black is taking the safe territory, so can't complain when he get sealed in.  he can play l7 or k7 for example, many ways in.
kefo - white thought he would need a big center, after black took so many on the bottom.  but black can still get in, so it was not a good result.  ---  The board is split between black's very loose territory at the top (more like potential territory at this point) and the wall that white has along the bottom. If white wants the centre, he needs to build up a moyo on top of black's top territory.  My first move here would be R14 to get territory. If black is helpful and plays O17 or R15 then you're already halfway to a nice big chunk of white territory.
kefo - looks small but white answered.  bad + bad = good?
kefo - black play here would hurt.  ---  It would. It's a shame you only played it after the last couple of moves that stopped it from working nicely with your influence lower down.
aranach - Gote territory grab. Feels bad now with white's weak looking top left corner group.  kefo - black can't call the top territory yet, but at least it is not white points.  think white has better chances than before, with strength facing the center.  but for safe points he can't compete with black.  ---  This is huge for black. A white play here (or at N17) would change the board considerably. This was very good for black. White has very little to really call his own, and black is sitting on some nice big areas.
kefo - j6 play for black instead looks good but he is taking the safe points, maybe it is ok.  ---  j6 might be nice, but I like this follow-up. Black has to remember not to let white get too much influence, but keeping this territory is nice for the moment.
aranach - One of my problems seems to be getting sealed in. I hoped this might prevent that.  kefo - interesting, was expecting l18.  maybe black was afraid to be sealed in, but even if he play l18 instead he can still get in.  and, don't think it is automatically bad to be sealed in, if you get more points at the end.  ---  aranach: You play a little bit /too/ safely, I'll admit. I do the same. Unfortunately, you seem to choose the wrong moments to go all-out for bravery! You really wanted L18 here. Never let your groups get split like this if you can possibly help it. Sort out the situation, then build off from your corner.
kefo - black cutting his own stones to make territory, was happy with this result.  ---  Oh yes.
aranach - Concern about eyespace after a monkey jump led me to this bad shape move.  ---  Concerns about monkey jumps are quite wise. Here, though, I would be tempted to move up first. Push out into the centre a bit to reduce white's centre. Your stones have a fair amount of room to make eyes, so you can afford to be a bit daring.  Regardless, for what you want to achieve I would have played H18 rather than the empty triangle that you made. :)
Too small. Push up first.
It's almost a silly rule, but if you find yourself making an empty triangle then there's almost /always/ another move that does the same thing more effectively.
This defence is unnecessary. Pushing along would be safe enough and would gain you lovely, lovely territory.
aranach - So much for not getting sealed out of the center, plus my groups were split.  kefo - yes, this is dream result for white.  felt game was over now, but black gave white a chance to lose later, and he took it. :)
kefo - not necessary, if white wants to play on this side maybe q12 or q13 is a play.
This is the empty triangle's fault. Learn to feel disdain for it.
aranach - I'm alive, though it's ugly, and I hope to break through the wall or skirt it.  kefo - p15 is not necessary.  ---  Well done, white. You took advantage of the weakness and stole a fair chunk.  P15 is indeed unnecessary, it would have been far better at R12.
kefo - think j16 instead, or h15.
Hmm. Although this worked out in the end, I would have preferred to see the threat of Q13 and watched black walk along the fourth line.
kefo - not very ambitious, black can still go up to l6.  ---  Yes. L6 is a nice peep that can connect either way. Still, it's relatively small compared to C14 or R12.
kefo [8k]: think u can play l6 instead of l5
kefo - of course black did not fall for l7, white m6, and then j7.
Better at C13 (or C12).
kefo - black nicely punished this.  ---  Black did well with this, but it was quite scrappy. There were mistakes on both sides and I wouldn't rely on this sort of play against stronger players!
aranach - I was happy to sieze this opportunity.  kefo - yes, this should be the end.  ---  (seize)  Black should now sit back and play ultra-safe moves until the end of the game.
You held out for a few moves, then got worried! Don't take the stones unless you really need to.
kefo - this does not work, as black shows.
Empty triangle again. Play B12 instead.
Unnecessary. Play at G16 or G17 to be safe.
This throws away sente for black. Find somewhere else to play. White can't cut, so why force him to make you connect solidly in gote?
kefo - big mistake.
kefo - or o8 directly.
kefo - black should keep going with p8.  lot of mistakes from both right to the end :)  ---  P18 would have been worth a couple more points. Given how close the game became, I can't disagree. :)
Here, I'll forgive it.
kefo - why not t12, is a good question.
kefo - white did not think he could afford to defend here, but also hard to afford the ko.  do not see how white can win it.  ---  It's all very small.
kefo - did not understand this.  ---  Yes, a mistake.
kefo - thought the ko would decide the game, so maybe it does not matter which ko.
kefo - during the game, thought black should continue the ko.  aranach - I felt white had far more ko threats, so I was trying to get something for my efforts.  ---  Never go half-heartedly into a ko. Either aim to win (in terms of points gained), or get out as soon as possible! :)
kefo - why play here?
aranach - I think I just lost a point.  ---  Yes. An unnecessary move.
nocturne19 [8k]: hi
Wrong direction.
I think this is the wrong side, b is pushing white towards three weak, unsupported stones. In any case, b needs a good follow-up move afterwards, to get his three stones out of trouble and keep up the pressure on w.
One drawback of this combination is that the ladder after w's cut at P11 favours w.
This doesn't put much pressure on O8, nor on Q4.
Now b made two empty triangles.
There really is no time to make an eye, and w cannot connect anyway.
B should exploit one of w's weaknesses: the possible cut between O8/P9
Now w's weakness is gone.
[Here I know I'm in trouble. Should I have played N4 instead?] Yes.
Good move by w.
[Another mistake?]
[Desperation sets in...]
[W's mistake opens a way out.]
Not a good attack by w.
W has tried too hard to capture b, hasn't taken any territory, and got himself into trouble.
W has thickness in the middle, but the wall around m4 has been neutralized.
The corner is usually bigger.
Bad move.
Good move. B spotted w's weakness at E2.
[Can W live?] No, this is dead.
This of course creates various cutting points for b, but he shouldn't forget he has one too at F17.
This doesn't do much: there as hardly any territory there for w, and it doesn't pressure the H14 group.
Good counter attack by w.
[I wasn't sure about this move and I payed for it later. I should concentrate on scoring and not capturing...but it looks so tempting. It doesn't seem to be as easy to capture as it looks.]
B still ahead though.
Another empty triangle: almost always bad shape.
Now the cut at F17 has suddenly become a problem.
[Here I mistakenly thought that the Black group in the bottom-right would still be alive after ignoring the ko threat. I wasn't sure if White or I had any remaining threats large enough. Trying to live results in an interesting race for seki which I missed by one. Is there something I could have done better to tie the race?]
[Maybe if B played L4 instead and W lets B get one eye later?]
[At this point I don't think B can get seki.] He's one liberty behind.
I don't prefer this move because it allows a B approach at B/C to work well from the lower right stone.  Locally, I would prefer A.
K- 3 point pincer to work as an extension from my bottom left corner, obviously only a mild threat to the black stone  BW:  In order to have the full effect of 'working' from your bottom left enclosure, you don't play closer to the enclosure, play all the way, such as the marked options.  Also, playing on the 4th line would be better in order to create a moyo.
K- I was happy with this exchange  BW:  I would be too.  C13 shows that B is too concerned with his D15 stone.  At this point in the game, you need to play lighter and not commit so early.  See variation for B.
K- need to defend my corner stone now
BW:  Don't change direction!  See variation.
K- I thought for some time over this move, and I'm still not convinced I got it right. I did not want to invade the right side yet,  because black would be able to use his chinese opening to good effect. So it was a choice between the upper or lower sides. I chose this move in the end because it creates a problem for black (how to invade the lower left corner?) and it prepares the way for a kakari in the lower right.  BW:  Not a bad move locally, but you have left a huge weakness at A.  The following proverb helped me to gain roughly 3 stones:  "Play urgent moves before big moves".  "A" is the urgent move in this case - it makes your group secure.
BW:  Ah, I see that B played it!
K- I'm confident of having a live group in the top left corner now, and providing I can keep the triangled stones somethng like safe, I can reduce the influence that black gets in exchange
K- allowing black to get this point would be very bad for my moyo, and if I try to extract the triangle stone instead, black can easily chase me around while getting key points such as this. I am worried about the top edge, but this move gives me a stronger position in the centre which I might be able to use to invade the top edge  BW:  Not bad reasoning.  However, your corner is still pretty open to a deep invasion, and you seem to have a lot invested in your corner.  I like how G11 counteracts the B wall though!
BW:  Good locally.  Playing at A is a common mistake.
K- I was very happy to take this point, it is always a point that I aim for against a low chinese opening. If black gets it, my invasion group must run to escape while black just makes territory  BW:  Yes, a good point.  But your stones below it look scary to me.
K- black is building a strong wall here which is threatening my moyo, so I want to change direction and not lead him any further in making his wall stronger
K- I was happy with this exchange, squashing the territory black can take here
K- and with this move, I thought I had pretty much the whole bottom left quarter of the board as territory, but...  BW:  I would prefer one move higher.  Then B would have to choose between invading the two marked areas.  See variation.
K- ....I had not accounted for this. Obviously one choice would be to cut it off from connecting to the marked stone and seek to kill the group that tried to live, but instead I chose to let it connect out and I would simply try to minimise the loss of territory  BW:  I would vote for option 1.  Cutting it off and gaining territory while attacking is good strategy.  See variation.
BW:  Instead play A or B.
K- so there it is, with almost 20 points lost and the potential for more if black plays here first in the future :-(  BW:  for the future, you have A as sente because it threatens B.
K- seems not so big at first, but has obvious intentions of making this group totally safe and using it as a springboard to attack the open side of my moyo.... my priority is to come away from this local exchange with sente  BW:  I agree.  If I was B I would play around A instead of defending.
K- I think this move is a turning point in the game. Before this I have built up a strong position, with territory in the lower left and a strong(ish) group in the lower right reducing black's territory. With this move I should be playing somewhere near A to prevent black making much territory in this area  BW:  I actually like this move because it threatens B group on the right.
BW:  Black ignores your move, so now is the chance to press on the group on the right.  See the continuation.
K- so now I have to invade, no choice  BW:  I'm not sure how to comment.  Other options are marked.  Either way, R12 would help a lot with the invasion/reduction.
BW:  bad move.  Now A is obvious for W.  B should try to force W to live on the side since it was such a deep invasion, then use his thickness to hurt the W territoty in the lower left.
K- with black having the 2 marked stones, I am concerned about this white group being short of eye space  BW:  But you have at least one eye in the corner, and you can jump around A.  I think your move is slow.  See the variation.
BW:  B should play A or B for a big gain.
BW:  This is slow.  What does it get you?
K- argh, no!! I wanted to play here first! This is the key point I referred to at the start. I think I was ahead until this point.
K- making eyespace and centre moyo  BW:  As you see from the next move, A attemps to shut B in and gives you large prospects.  Your group above is not in much danger as it is out into the middle already.
BW:  This is what hurts.
BW:  Why are you reluctant to start a ko?  To be honest, I haven't looked to see who has how many ko threats, but in general, you should not back down.
BW:  ABSOLUTELY 'A'.  B is toying with you because you seem intimidated.
BW: Still, A.
BW:  Now is a good time to check the endgame situation.  B's move is horrible.  What is he accomplishing buy that space in the middle?  See the marked points.  They are all large endgame points - much larger than what B just did.  Try to appreciate this and you will become much stronger.
BW:  Urrrgggg!  If living is your priority, take some territory with A!
K- there goes my centre moyo... too busy keeping weak groups alive  BW: The marked area was not going to become your territory - because B always had the current move plus encroaching from the bottom.  You should be playing the points I highlighted earlier.
K- ok, both groups should be pretty safe now
K- at this point I think black is slightly ahead (5 points?), having profitted from my weak invasion at A and with me not playing B in time. So I'm taking the chance to get in some sente moves that should swing the game back to being dead even  BW:  I count B with 60ish and W with 60ish!
BW:  small move
K- maybe I have a slight lead now, but I still have a rather thin group to protect
K- at this point the game is so close it could go either way, so I am going to try for a decisive blow in this top right area - maybe a live group, maybe connecting out, maybe capturing some stones - not sure yet, so I'll throw in some stones and see how black responds
K- it seems unlikely black will let me live here, so I'll have to fight a ko to connect out  BW:  this is certainley successful for W.  Even if you lose the ko, you will get a big move somewhere else.
BW:  good move.
BW:  in hindsight, making B play here is what allowed him to play P17 in sente.  oops!
BW: You have to make a threat that B will answer - the triangled point.
BW:  Now the ko is over.
K- so, black won the ko, and overall the game is still so close it could go either way - so my gambit had failed, no decisive blow struck in the top right corner
k- however, I have sente, I'll have to try to pull ahead on endgame moves...
K- I have sente now, but black is slightly ahead...
BW:  This is a good move.  6 points in reverse sente.
K- sente again, and the game is dead even... nailbiting finish...
BW:  B should play away.
This black move is played at A or B usually.
B2 is played only for killing, B has weakness around C5.A is correct here.
Nice for white - has secure shimari in top right, nice shape on bottom. Black has only 1 side and not solid at all.
Never.
Very bad, see variation.
Q 13 is a big threat, black should play ko.
fd: MONKEY JUMP  Commentator: taking ko first seems good.
fd: what's the best way to answer this move?
fd: pincer  Commentator: I think this is bad - after black lives with A, you have an inefficient group as R10 is nicely ereasing the wall you create. R6 in your variation seems better (with a little correction).
Connect at A! This leaves a cut and weak position.
Terrible move.
Terrible move. Almost 2 passes in row.
fd: J7 is also big  Commentator: Still the geta at A is most solid. Cap is unwise - the cut at B is a severe weakness. If attack the stone, then with C.
Did you thank to your opponent?
Shape is better at A.
You push in wrong direction. Where are W's points? In the centre.
Needed move.
Too soft. White is behind like this.
fd 68 @ H8 is bigger I think  Commentator: Definitely. You can not let opponent sever your group like this. Look at your triangled stones - wasted. That is quite a loss.
Magari is biggest! These 10 points are not important.
fd: I played a but b is better  Commentator: Agree. A big loss for W.
This should have been tenuki. White is connected in the center. This is like 10 pts move. Game is over for W. Around A is the vital point now.
Why? 3 pts max.
Last 10 - 15 moves were almost worthless - it was micro endgame. Never play this kind of endgame so early!
Biggest point
Start a fight at A. I'd try B to see how black responds.
Seems crude.
fd: White played A but may be B is better to shield the center?  Commentator: Center is nothing - even when you close center on left, black jumps to A and it's veeery small.
A for black is good enough.
fd: Can W play at B?
Embarassing move, B should play ko.
fd: W b would be much better  Commentator: Agree, but still A is ok.
A is only way.
So black lives.
Why this? It's not sente and W is not leading. If black just plays A, is ok.
Must be at A. W'd lose like that of course.
I do not like this move
when a 4-4 stone is played in a corner it is capible of extending on both sides. For instance D16 wants to extend to K16(17) or D10(C10). so I would say this extenstion at R8 although it is short it does not take the extention the 4-4 stone wants.
this exchange is not good for black, it removes much of the aji in invading the corner at R17, which can be done later, instead black gives white tons of corner territory and is happy.
ddyer [?]: not a good start for black
This move is small, sure by playing P18 your not allowing the monkey jump, but there are many bigger moves on the board.
this is not sente, white can probably make many attacking moves on black's group before black can find time for his follow up
this is an error of direction
I would receomend against moves like these, they aren't really sente, black could leave this, and white still has not fixed the problem of a move like b2, which with more outside moves or in other cases can be a huge problem
this move cannot connect, black should not respond here
as you can see by what follows this move is way too close
white can also take advantage of his sente moves
bobc [?]: bad to go in this direction first
it is difficult for white to connect
bobc [?]: this center stuff was key
bobc [?]: oh yeah...ogt snookered with this
bobc [?]: you ate into both my areas quite a bit ddyer [?]: no more big fights,but a close game bobc [?]: yeah
sanrensei with white is a difficult game  remember you have to take 1 or 2 to complete sanrensei  as you saw in the game, black leaded all the time  if you start with sanrensei you need to be very aggressive in chuban, at least avoiding any black's tentative to make a moyo  your interest in fuseki is very promising
Not sure about this move. I was trying to attack the marked black group.
I'm quite pleased with my moyo now and I think I have to attack black somehow.
Trying to attack the B stone at Q17 and streghten right side group at the same time...
very dangerous
slow, helping black to close the mojo
This feels a bit slow, but it does close the black group in the corner...
What's the biggest reduction I can play at this point? I feel that this move is a bit lacking...  these two moves are dame, in exchange with 3 and 4  black should be leading
I'm not pleased with how this played out, E12 might've been better...
Would it have been better to capture the marked stone? I felt that black could've done more damage to me by playing somewhere around the marked white stone...
m6 is a gift now
Should probably be one space higher...
But black just connects...
Maybe N12 is better...
Is this smaller than playing at F9 instead and letting black capture the stone?
And now I realize I can kill the corner group..
And I realize black wasn't dead with one outside liberty left and correct...
[Malweth]: I noticed a few areas where you could stand to improve, especially along the lines of Life & Death and Attacking with thickness (not using thickness to create territory).   It would also be good to review the important parts of the board, where groups are still not settled and in high positions. Low positions and playing against settled or thick groups is usually "uninteresting" (e.g. low value).  I hope these comments help you improve quickly!  ---- Hi, I'm Daniel (14 years old, Portuguese), it's the first time I'm sending a game to you, and I'm doing it because I like to see reviews, they help me to improve, and I'd like to have one with a game I've played, so... here it is. Thanks for commenting amateurs games.
[Malweth]: Although playing against software can be good practice, it's usually best to play against real people.  ---- In this game I played Black, against TensaiGo softwere. I'd like you to tell me my mistakes, please.
[Malweth]: Although this move is joseki, K16 is a good alternative. This keeps in mind the overall idea behind the ni-ren-sei (black's 2 star points).  This move cannot be faulted, though.
[Malweth]: This is the correct response.
[Malweth]: This made your response sente, so you get an early lead. White needed to play C17 first.
[Malweth]: This seems to be in the wrong direction. The D18 group is very low (all 3rd line and below) so the low stone here is less interesting than Q14, for example.  See the variation.
[Malweth]: This is the only move in this situation, but see how this influence affects the top side...
[Malweth]: Now you have a wall facing low stones. There is no moyo and the possibiliites of moyo are only moderate.  This is why M17 was not the best move.
[Malweth]: This jump is in the wrong direction. White's stones at R14 are low. White has more possibility for expansion along the lower side, so that is where the board is most interesting for black.
[Malweth]: This extension is actually very good for White. Black will feel silly playing P3 or Q3 now, but will be open at the 3-3 if the play is around N3.
[Malweth]: The normal approach is better here. Usually C6. C11 is too far away to be a pincer.  See variations.
[Malweth]: This seems small, though it is an important point. Your D7 group is weak and your Q4 group can be invaded. The protection of one of these seems best.   Note that D7 does not have a good follow up as C9 is too small an extension. C4 is the best move locally.  You could also try for moyo on the top side with G15, but O17 still has a lot of life.
[Malweth]: P3/Q3 is better.
[Malweth]: White could probably do better...
[Malweth]: This move dies... see variation.
[Malweth]: Good kill.
[Malweth]: This was totally unnecessary. See variations.  ---- whites group is dead so, here I was more confortable :D
[Malweth]: White is causing you big trouble now!!
[Malweth]: This move is vacuous. Something with meaning around here might be O18 (small considering the fight on the left). Better is for white to create a wall to push the floating black group into... G15 springs to mind... H16 is probably even better.
[Malweth]: You should work on Life & Death. I suggest books 2 & 3 of "Graded Go Problems for Beginners."  Do not look at the answers until you are 120% certain your answer is correct. Visualize all variations for both sides, even the ones you're certain don't work.  In other words, White is already dead... doubley.
[Malweth]: It might not look like much, but White has gained a lot here. There's little you could do - they were all forcing moves. White IS ruining any chance of attack, but this failed with L11.  ---- ...
[Malweth]: Black at O13 was bad... See variation.
[Malweth]: These moves didn't accomplish much! Your wall is not being put to use...  See variations.
[Malweth]: This is why computers are bad opponents (for review and otherwise). The G9 stone is more important than the G11 stone (for moyo at least) but the computer saves the worthless stone.  Aside from the problems with O14 the top side is fairly solid.
[Malweth]: Pushing in at G7 prevents moyo better. You're trying to take territory using influence (between Q4 and N4). This goes against proverb (use thickness to attack, don't play near thickness, don't make territory with thickness, etc).
[Malweth]: Nearly all of the last ~20 moves have been to take territory. It seems like yose has been entered too early or oyose should be reviewed (if possible... I'm not sure what resources are available).
[Malweth]: Danger! See variation. Always look where atari could cause major problems for you!
SpyPower [2k]: gg
What are some standard ways to approach this black formation? this pincer seems ideal for black.  dv: The pincer may seem ideal but is actually lukewarm. It is too far a pincer to apply high pressure and too far an extension from the corner enclosure so that an invasion is still possible.  This pincer does not occur in any professional game at gobase. Which doesn't mean for us amateurs it be easy to refute.  My feeling is that pressing the black corner at A or B would be correct but i need to check with the opinion of stronger players. I've posted the question at http://senseis.xmp.net/?BQM395 You can follow it up with me there.  See variations.
This is unreasonable.
With this variation White turns the pincer into an effective checking move (keeping white's extension in check). White is cramped.
Low?  dv: it's a correct move with which Black restores his position.
It is difficult to find a good move for W now: either you add a stone and the position becomes a little overconcentrated or you leave it and it remains a bit weak.  But this move has little purpose: it has a high risk of ending up as a neutral point. A is better to strengthen the group (but as said it is perhaps overconcentrated).
Is this a good or bad move?  dv: it is a strange move. It strengthens white and gets a little bit in return.
Q13 instead?  dv: I always prefer a 4-th line move (A) over a 2nd-line move in the opening, but your move is possible.  On the other hand, you can wonder if this must be answered. You get a chance to give purpose to the previous move.
I understand the call for attack.
This looks promising now for White
Maybe attack at A.
This is not urgent. These stones are light. Here it starts to go a little wrong for White. See variation.
All this leaning gives a lot of sure territory to Black, while the attack on the Black group is uncertain.
This is bad of course
Both previous move Black should simply jump to A.
I prefer to surround at A first, instead of removing the base while threatening to connect underneath, but it may be preference.
You cannot back off here. See variation.
Two times you play an attachment with this effect. Black gets a full triangle, blighting the marked stone. If this is an unwanted effect, you should not play such attachment + retreat.  This is an example of calculating a little ahead and then evaluating the shape. I believe you played the attachment out of desire to enclose. But as we know, attachment rarely fulfills this purpose: it is rather an emergency measure or a leaning maneuvre.
Too tight?  dv: Yes, absolutely. Already without the friendly stones around it is very tight. Now it is plain overconcentration.
White is now seriously falling behind.  1) on territory: White only has the bottom against Black's top and three corners. 2) on strength: neither of White's two running groups are stabilized yet.
So, White must look for chances to get back into the game.  - the top is absolutely unsiegable - the bottom left is also sure territory - there may be a small chance of attacking the middle right, but its nose sticking out with the full triangle it will be difficult  the bottom right looks like the only place where sth can be done.
So you came to the same conclusion, but I'm thinking of sth like the var.
The correct point to pressure the corner is A, because it aims at B.
Black is biting off every bit of territory you have, challenging White to attack the middle group. It looks too strong indeed to attack.
reasonable?  dv: Well, it uses the weakness of the white group to strengthen the black group, so yes, reasonable. White must now fight very hard to attack the group effectively but I do not see how it can be killed.  If White can play so as to take the marked territory however, then there are still chances.
perhaps better at A
With this exchange all Black weaknesses have disappeared and White has lost his chances, for the territorial lead is too large.  Conclusion:  - you got off a bad start with the cramped extension at A, leaving your group weaker than should (see variations at that point) - the whole leaning against the top to attack black's central group ended up futile - giving Black strong shapes as the full triangles should be avoided under most fighting circumstances
This is not necessary. With good endgame you can still come close.
SpyPower [2k]: thnx cardmagic [3k]: thanks
Chris: After seeing this, I expected White to be much weaker than the indicated rank. To keep your calm, we should analyse the board position:  W12 is in a horrible position and the whole group is as good as base-less. W14 is in an OK spot, but getting a good result on both sides is impossible for White. Question: Where is the vital point for the bottom White group?
Chris: This move is bad, it does not punish White overplay. It shows greed, "just" taking the corner. Or do you seriously think, that with such weakness outside, White can attack you at all?
Chris: Horrible by White. Now he has two base-less groups; if Black plays correctly.
Chris: B21, B23 are thankyou-moves, fixing whites weak shape.
Chris: Black has given up his own base while allowing White to get one in the same space. This cannot be a good way to play.
Chris: Another harsh overplay. I would consider this rude.
I'm not sure why tenuki here.   F1 kills.  I'm not sure why white played C14 and not E1.  Chris: Even if this answer is soft and squishy, leaving White WAY to much room.
This seems small, but I was hoping to get to the two white stones.  Chris: This is not small, in fact it is one of the most urgent, and pointwise also very big on board, on Par with A and B and C
Where best for b?
Chris: This seems wrong direction as White gains some strength in the centre, helping his floating group.
Chris: The invasion here is greedy, top side is bigger, attacking centre group is most urgent. These can probably be considered thank-you moves, as the influence will help White settle the centre group.
Chris: Wrong direction, see variation.
I misread this.  I simply miscounted liberties.  I belive O11 is good enough.
Tompy [4k]: ooops
Chris: W got tedomari, big loss for Black. The last 30 moves should be studied very carefully by Black. He should spend considerable time thinking about how to exploit the weakness of Whites floating centre group during the entire game.   Observe how 1.) the technique of leaning attacks can be employed to make an attack more severe.  2.) How the direction of play is directed by weak groups on the board 3.) The shape issues of attacking especially in the beginning.  This is the last comment, I think the rest of the games is pointless battles. Black will gain 2 stones if the middlegame concepts mentioned so far are thoroughly grasped.
this move seems unnecessary?  B is alive.
jldl [4k]: th Tompy [4k]: no problem. Tompy [4k]: Pretty obvious.  :)
I don't think this is a threat, but did not read it out enough.
Tompy [4k]: Too many Tompy [4k]: Timed game.
Playing for lax moves here as black.  Surely losing moves.  B T15 should win the game.
Very timid move.
Yo, mr. reviewer! I lost this game with terrible score, but i dont know real strength of my opponent, so...  TM:  Hello, I am the reviewer.  I will prefix my comments with "TM".
Dont know about this response, i guess its normal.  TM:  This move is a bit uncommon, but playable.  It seems that you didn't know what to do with these stones during the fighting later, so it would help to have a plan for where to follow up after Q14:  consider an attack around A or an extension to B, for example.
Still it seems to me pretty good)  TM:  This seems fine.  You will have a strong position if you can make R7 work with your stones at the top.
Dont know about this. I give up some stones for developing fast.  TM:  This strategy is incoherent.  You sacrificed the bottom right corner for fast development, but now white is strong and your groups are weak.  Since the bottom left was empty and R7 is alone, you should think of making stable groups instead.
TM:  The natural move.
dont know about this move.  TM:  This looks good.  Since your groups are weak, you can later aim towards A (for example) to try to connect them.
Here became problems. I doubt in every my move)
TM:  White is doing a good job of keeping your groups separated.
TM:  This is dangerous.  You are helping white build a wall and connect his stones. This might be a good attack if you had a pincer around A, but since the top is open, you should instead jump out.
TM:  Too submissive.  White easily connects his stones.
TM:  Is this move necessary?  How about putting some pressure on white?  You seem to be getting pushed around by your opponent, and as a result he is building very solid groups.  But he has weaknesses too, especially his J4 group.  Notice that you've played seven stones just to capture two of his.
TM:  Good move, but the timing is off.  Look at how much stronger this move would have been before white got the marked stones.
guess i still dont lose this game. what must i do? To defend D4 group or to prevent C15, which is very big for W now, in my opinion. Best is defend D4 in sente, by attacking H7 group, but i dont know how). So i prefer standart probe at C15, but i think its dubious because of pincer is too good for W.  TM:  Yes, white has a very strong position and a lot of influence on the top and left sides. You will have to work hard to erase his potential territory.
Well... it was bad)
TM:  Good, this was a clever attack.  If you can break into white's territory you will even out the game.
TM:  Why not fight the ko?  You don't have anything to lose here.
I guess it still playable, but this move is really stupid. Its hard to kill my L9 group, so its better to jump at k 17 or simply cut at f8 - its pretty hard for W...  TM:  Indeed!
TM:  Very thick.  This group is now unstoppable.
TM:  This is uneffective.  It doesn't threaten white's group, and you have no moyo to build. White will be happy to defend while taking territory.  Better for you would be to invade white's moyo or to try to make territory at the top.
Now i see - W shape is strong and territory on the left side is giant! i still can get some center points by attack W P17 group, so H11 can be useful. I must play K17 or  even L17, than M16 or so... I was afraid for my R9 group, but its pretty safe... Top is urgent.
Guess i unconditionally lost the game here.
TM:  These are just endgame moves and don't help your position.  White can easily keep you separated, and meanwhile only makes his group stronger.
Here i dont know technique too. Maybe C7 is better?  TM:  Yes!  There is a big difference between B7 and C7.
TM:  You should now expect your opponent to try something in the corner. The seki that happened later could have been avoided.
TM:  Again, you should not be ignoring D1.
yopparai [16k]: hi yopparai [16k]: good game
paragoomba [17k]: hello
paragoomba [17k]: good game
I've played this game out and seen what happens, now I'm going to go over a few points (only a few important ones that i think will help you if you keep them in mind, if I type in too many points, you'll never remember all of it. ;D). In particular, I'd like to go through the intention of your stones, and how to make them more efficient. (efficiency is what wins your game.) AND the "corner golden, side silver, centre straw" theory.
This move is OK. Extending in the beginning and 'mapping out' potential territory is a good idea. A better move is [A]. White's (from now on White will be referred to as 'W'.) stone is 'facing' black (D4). Usually W will want to play around A because it encirlces the corner and almost guarantees W a corner at the end. To prevent this from happening, B(black) plays around A. The positions on the left hand side favour B's placement at A.  Why? B has a back-up stone at D4 and many W's replies will strengthen the relationship between A and D4. That's good for B.
What did you want to achieve with this stone? Did you want extend out? Take the corner? Stop W coming in? In any case, playing a 'contact move' (playing next to it, in this case, a diagonal move is also considered a contact move) is not good. It strengthens W and B has better moves to make.
Bad shape. We call it an empty triangle. For a shape with 3 stones, it has the least possible liberties.  It's good for the opponent to take advantage of this shape.  If you wanted to separate these stones (good idea, bad execution):
yopparai [16k]: sorry - internet problem
Capping is good move, but here it doesn't work. W can run off in too many different places and B cannot chase. First protect your group before attacking.  Triangle marks cutting point. If W cuts here, B is in big trouble and usually dies.
Again, contact moves. Attacking is good, but if you play too close, it doesnt work. Move out a little and surround, then close in for the kill.
Yup, contact move after contact move. Spread out some more in the beginning. It offers you backup and is just as dangerous as a contact move, if not more so.
mr5willows [-]: that solves the problem
Emoticon [14k?]: Hello and good game
placebo253 [11k?]: hi gg too
Just so you can get a feel for a professional fuseki, here are the next few moves in a pro game that starts the same as yours. (Yanagawa Hiromasa 5d vs Rin Kaiho 9d, 1989)
Emoticon: I really am bad at pincer josekies.
I'd probably try R8, but that's just me.
Emoticon: Maybe K4 is a better point.
Emoticon: I shouldn't have played ths sequence. My reading gave a crash here.  Agreed, but it didn't work out that badly for you.
Emoticon: Maybe it's better to play at H17 or so. I was afraid of white getting the second eye in center, since group can get another eye easily at the top.  No, your sequence was correct.  It takes away the corner.
F16 is safer.
White has given you a huge wall facing your influence on the left side.  At this point, you have won the game.  Congratulations.  Now you just have to hold on to your terrific lead.
Small.  Punish W by invading at R3.
Emoticon: I didn't like the fight that follwed here. There should have been a better way.
Note that a simple G9 leaves no aji for white to attack you.
Emoticon: Better at L10.  Tom: I disagree.  This move is fine.
Emoticon: I missed my chence to invade corner.
Emoticon: Maybe better at M2 or F2? Or, maybe, monkey jump at D1.  Yes, M2 is probably best, it captures and you have monkey jump options on both sides.
Emoticon: Same here, except for N2 instead of M2.
The key to responding to this kind of invasion is to recognize that white must either: 1) live or 2) escape to connect to a living group. In this case your huge walls mean white cannot escape anywhere, so your first priority is to keep white from getting enough space to make eyes.  I'd probably play K18 or L17, which cut down on white's space, and reduce the threat potential at J18.
This move isn't necessary, look at your impenetrable thickness!
Emoticon: Was it this move that allowed W to connect by playing under the stones a bit later?  Well, you could have cut white off but the stones would probably live anyway.  At this point you should be playing underneath to destroy eyespace.
Emoticon: Maybe better at N18?
Emoticon: Now it seems unnecessary.  Tom: Yes, the stones are dead.
Emoticon: Now that I look at it, it seems that possible ko is not that serious, so I should have don something about weaknesses at the left. Is that right?  Tom: Yes, the ko is pretty small, I might play F11 or similar.  But really the left side wasn't that weak, you just made mistakes defending it.
This is where black gives away the game the first time.  White can ignore your attempt to cut, and play F11, ruining your territory and winning the game.
White is nice to you.  F11 is better.  Black has a chance to win again.
No!! Fill in!  This is probably the move that lost the game for black.  Simple D9, and black wins by 10+ points
white opens a huge ko and ruins black's side.  Black has no ko threats this big.
Don't bother with ko threats now, try to protect your territory.
Actually a bad move for white.  This kill is big (about 5 points) but a move like C13 is quite a bit bigger, as it generates big territory for white and ruins any hope black has of using that beautiful wall.
No, this move is much smaller than C12, or something similar.
Bad move.  Actually you can't cut white here.
I almost never play san san so I can't be definitely sure about the fact the strategy is good or not... but D15 seems small to me even if it gives you the choice to extend either on the left or right. (at G17 or at C13)
white 12 gets C11 seperated from your E4's group and...
... the result is not good for black since white made a base on the side whithout any difficulty  whereas black's wall on line 6 is still useless.
I'm not really happy with this kind of extension so i think it would be better to play at C13.  It is more secure for black.
i
I don't think it's the moment for that move. Your priority should be the empty areas of the board.   Moreover this move tends to limit the influence of white on the center which is logical if you have a real influence on it but that's not really the situation  here.
black29 is not interesting at this moment of the game.  I think you shuld go for the eastern side of the board to prevent white from making more influence there.   At this moment of the game there are still empty areas where you can make bases.
Not really sure where to go here, I just didnt want to ignore the threat, but I am also not sure if trying to gain more territory in the center is a good idea.  Actually there's no real threat here and...
... as you see the way you answer white's move helps him to increase his influence on the East.
The sequence from white 30 to white 44 is really bad for black taking into account black's "small" invasion after.
Black 49 is bad because it doesn't use the opportunities white left to escape.
No more comments from there apart from the conclusion.
Thank you very much for taking the time to review this game. I accepted this challange from a higher ranked opponent, but ended up resigning early on without much insight into what had gone wrong. Hopefully you can help me understand the situation better.   -Meekohi  Fernobob: I'll try.
Fernobob: This is a bit of an overplay. It works very well when there is a stone on or near the triangled point to stop white from making a base but doesn't work so well without as white can settle easily and blacks corner is still not quite secure (see variations).
Fernobob: The triangled point is more normal as it is more open and thus more easily developeable over the bottom. Your move is acceptable though, especially when A is not there.
Fernobob: This is the high approach and is absolutely correct.
Meekohi: This seemed alright, but maybe E16 would have prevent later problems?  This is alright but probably not best. The result is the same as if black had approached with A, then extended with B, which would have happened had he made the low approach. This is not so good for black as in the situation the high approach was correct and the low approach would have been less good.  As for a better move, I don't think whites move is reasonable and so it probably hasn't been researched much. E 16 or 17 look good to seal white in and run for the center though.
This sequence of moves was only worth a few points whch were essentially blacks anyway but has lost a liberty and solidified whites position. Typically you shouldn't play any moves as small as this until near the end of the game when they are the most valuable points on the board.
Fernobob: This sequence is very bad for black as it allows white to defend all of his weaknesses while
Meekohi: I wanted to prevent white from grabbing too much of the top, but maybe was not aggresive enough.  Fernobob: This is actually maybe too aggressive. It prevents white from getting too much on top but you don't really need to worry about that as you're well ahead and should instead play a more defensive move such as A or B to make a nice territory.
I wasted too much time on this tiny group, this move probably wasn't important to keep it alive.  Fernobob: Yep
Fernobob: This is good, though then there is no stone at A or B, the triangled point is usually better.
Meekohi: Up until this move I still felt very good about the game. I had no idea how to react to this invasion.  Fernobob: You are well ahead and this invasion is unreasonable. It might live, but if you play at the triangled point, cutting it off from the other white stone, both stones are very weak and chances are at least one will die.
Fernobob: It would be hard to forsee this happening but it's a fairly common pattern so watch out for it.
This stone actually does nothing. it doesn't seal white in  because of the weakness at A and doesn't defend anything. If you want to stop white, the cap at B is probably better. (See variations).
This move is actually unnecessary as it defends against the double atari at A, but you don't need to worry about the double atari as you can just sacrifice the triangled stone as it was doing nothing.
You should have defended at A before making this attack. I think there might be some proverb about it which boils down to defending local weaknesses before attacking on a large scale.
Black has two weak groups now (triangled). They are maybe too far apart for you to attack both at once and so the correct technique is usually to chase them into each other, then split them apart when they are close. According to 'Attack and Defense', which incidentally is an excellent book, this is often one of the most devastating manouvres in the game.
This drives the white stone to attack the triangled stones. Nevertheless, it may still be a good move as it does drive the white stone about but it may be better to chase the less mobile group with A.
This looks ugly.it defends your eyespace a bit but you could make this unnecessary by running to the centre with A, which would also indirectly attack the triangled stones.
Meekohi: Useless move in hindsight  I quite like it actually. It's sente and stops white playing there to make very nice shape.
Meekohi: Taking a wider look at the board, I was becoming worried about white closing off the top-center entirely.  As previously said, you don't need to worry about this. It's unreasonable to try and stop white from getting any territory. You just need to stop him from getting more than you.
Meekohi: This turns into a disaster quickly, R15 would have been better but I was worried about white taking the corner.  Fernobob: I'm not sure really.It doesn't look so good but R15 doesn't so much either. I think R16 might be better.
this stone can't actually live and so it is useless trying to defend it. A play at A instead would seal white off far more effectively. It is often worth sacrificing a few stones to seal your terriotry, especially when the stones are already dead.
Meekohi: Useless.  Fernobob: Yep
Fernobob: I assume you noticed what was wrong with this. It's generally worth reading a bit with weak stones to make sure they can escape before trying or you can make it very easy for the opponent.
This virtually forces white to reduce your territory. A would be better as it stops him in sente.
Meekohi: At this point I looked over the board again and realized I had basically no territory to speak of, so resigned.  Meekohi has resigned.  Fernobob: You don't have much, but neither does white. You also have a group to attack in the lower left and so although you're behind, it may be worth playing on.
GoForGlory [7k]: hi queenofgo [7k]: hi gg GoForGlory [7k]: gg
krv: I prefer R3 here, but I can't explain why. May be this move is ok
krv: don't answer at all. Or take immediately.
i couldn't find any reason to continue to play around q9 stone. but at the end of the game this move(m17) became useless.  krv: Seems like m17 is ok. Other possible moves are P17 and J4.
krv: I like Q9 here
krv: O6 to block white group first.
krv: still O6
krv: I'm not sure if black can block white to the left, but B5 seems better
what should i do against an invansion like this? krv: accurately protect. this stone is dead. I like M3 now.
krv: G3
krv: that's why O6 petter than N6
maybe i could play j 17 instead. krv: I prefer M15 here
try to invade, hopeless.
krv: when invading, try cut. R17
white missed something here.
Is this really a good move?.. Didn't want to respond to it.. thought his intentsions was to make a fight so he got a good wall and try to make a large territory on the left.. so went for tenuki and played in the last corner before getting to it.  Ted: I don't particularly care for it.  I would have played something more conventional like L4 or K4.
Ted: I think I'd split the stones by playing at Q12.
Ted: This, not your next move, is the mistake; it would have been better to play at Q16 to keep everything connected.
Felt this was a bad move because of the followup, don't know if I could have made a better response to the next move.  Ted: Here I think I would have preferred O17 to this or your suggestion of P17.
Think I was trying to make eye shape while attacking his lonely stone or something like that.  Ted: The empty triangle is bad, as they say.  I'd probably play N17 here.
Ted: This move doesn't do anything for you, other than to make White play something he'd only have to play eventually anyhow.  It's probably better to jump out toward the center now.
Ted: This only gets you one point, and doesn't need to be played as long as you can still jump out from K15 and 14.  I'd try something more aggressive like J16.
Ted: Up to this point, White has been making things remarkably easy on you.
Ted: This is one of White's big mistakes; White should have sacrificed this stone to save the bigger group,
Ted: I think the other atari makes your life easier
Ted: You didn't need to capture immediately.
Ted: White plays another small move.  Having lost a big group, White needs to do something about where you're trying to get territory.  Attacking someplace like D13 is important.
Gaining territory on the fifth line is a really nice, I gain about twice as much then him here =)  Ted: Yes, and it's another example of how passively White played.  The rest of the game needs no further comment.  You're already well in front.
moshes [23k]: hi, good luck
Jeff: Not sure if you were worried about something specific here, but I'll give a variation that secures the corner and gives some nice prospects for territory.
Jeff: As a general rule pushing from behind like this is considered bad.
Jeff: Variation accomplished the same idea.
Jeff: This empty triangle is bad and can be exploited.
Jeff: Good point, but I feel cutting the marked stones is bigger.
Jeff: Now it's connected and protected.
moshes: This was obviously an error, I think I should have played J18 instead. Jeff: Perhaps not. J18 is gote (you must make the last play). See variations.
moshes: I realized that I could extend out (J14) but I was concerned about his getting into the corner so I chose to back down instead. Jeff: Sometimes keeping the other player disconnected is the best option. By sacrificing J15, white has one completely connected shape on the board while you have two disconnected chunks.
moshes: This I think was overly cautious, I should have gone to K13 instead. Jeff: Both accomplish the same task, but K13 is better.
moshes: now I should have protected at M17.  :( Jeff: Yes, it appears that way in hindsight. Although there might have been a complicated way to win (I can't come up with it without forcing white to make a mistake).
Jeff: This stone feels kind of sloppy. See two alternatives.
moshes: now I should have gone to C19 I think. Jeff: C19 can be considered endgame. There are many bigger points.
Jeff: May be kind of slow. You have strength in this area, so a knights move can be made.
moshes: obvious error, I should have gone to A18, then A19 is no one's point. Jeff: Right, which would have resulted in very little change in score overall.
Jeff: Again, think about the pushing from behind. It gives white a good wall and white is always one step ahead (can cap you are any time and make you bend back on yourself -- see variation).
Jeff: I feel like the two variations are better.
Jeff: Good moves.
moshes: I think that instead of playing here now I should have pressed white at M5 or 6. Jeff: Yes, but my variations give even stronger results. The idea is the same though. Black has enough stones, he should always put pressure on in a handicap game.
Jeff: Perhaps unnecessary.
moshes: I think I handled this attack reasonably well.  There may have been better moves but I didn't make most of my usual mistakes and as a result he didn't get away with much of his attack.  I'd be happy to see suggestions for how to have done better, though. Jeff: It was good. White was grabbing at straws here, and as long as your moves kept you alive, white was dead.
Jeff: If you try to reason it out, we can see that this move is paranoid.
moshes: now I see it.  I knew an opportunity to cut him was coming, but I missed it during the game.  I think that now I should have gone to H10.  Let's see... Jeff: There are too many "if's" here. If white made no mistakes I think not much would have been gained.
Jeff: Another wasted move. What could white have done here?
moshes: that's it, my opportunity to cut is lost.  :(
Jeff: This might have been a weak point, but I probably wouldn't have worried about it much.
Jeff: Typically touching stones will make them stronger. So don't touch when defending.
Jeff: See previous comment.
moshes: I wanted to protect myself without making an empty triangle.  This was the only place I could think of.  I'm not sure whether A3 would have been better. but I thought it might have allowed him to sneak out and make another eye. Jeff: In this case the empty triangle was probably ok. (Every rule has its exceptions, typically in the corners)
White is greedy and inconsistent
Good
This is a mistake? What do I do?  Dieter: see variation.
Here you are trying to protect the small territory at the top. Instead, you should use the wall to attack the three floating white stones.  See var.
This is also submissive defense of small territory. Locally you can play A but I would even try B globally.
You are strong in the vicinity, so you must instinctively fight, even if you don't know what will come of it.  See var.
Suddenly White gets strong influence in the centre with a successful corner invasion. The reluctance to attack and fight with influence is responsible. The marked stones show the submissive moves.
Good.
The centre is still the main area of interest.  The two triangled groups are searching for eyespace in the same area. The squared stones fight to get ahead. One of these areas is the most important one and I think it is the left side.  But the corner invasion can be seen as a probe too, so I don't necessarily disapprove of the move
Wrong side
This is not possible.  It looks like a blitz mistake.
You pull off something like a corner invasion, but the loss in the center is too big.
Now White makes it complicated. He is angry about the invasion, while he should be happy with the acquired central strength  See var.
This is a very versatile move.
This is a thick move, but I don't know if you have time to play it.  At this move, you should probably cut and fight at A.  Also, the corner is not dead yet. It is ko. Throughout the game, both players seem to believe it is dead. I will continue the comment as if this were true.
Here the cut at A is a real opportunity.
Does the cut still work? Difficult to read. See var.
Still White can be cut. But the reading is difficult.
From here onward, Black tries to compensate for the loss in the lower left by making territory at the top. A simple count will show that this is not sufficient. Instead, Black should explore White's weaknesses and use all the strength at the top to attack them. There are two: A and the gap at B.  At move 150, the opportunity to cut at A gets lost. The ko in the lower left is never explored.  End of comments.
With all chances on a cut gone, the game is over.
Here is where I resigned. Thanks!
Hello, I'm playing White in this game and I felt it went well for me most of the time (please verify that). Losing was quite a disappointment for me, although I knew I made terrible mistakes in the end.  Please comment on any situation you have a feeling about, any interesting feedback can be helpful for my weakening go skills :)  I've made some comments/questions along the way, please verify/answer them.  df: My comments will be marked with df.  I think you are too focussed on territory and capturing big groups.  You allow yourself to get weak while your opponent gets thick, then you try to kill the lower left while he takes territory.
df: The 3-3 and 4-4 points are more popular because this move gives black a good approach move, abckup by his stone in the lower corner.
df: Professionals almost always attach at A in this position.
This move is supposed to no longer be considered joseki, but I didn't know that at the time of the game. I believe a lot of us amateurs play it a lot.  df: This move is fine,
Now this is bad, right? C15 instead gives White a huge corner and Black a cramped position but it didn't occur to me.
Now if I was Black I'd feel K4 was the natural move and as White I'd feel uncomfortable answering Black K4.  How could the game progress after Black K4 now? Would that be really good for Black?  df: K4 or O3 is just a matter of style.  Both are fine.  I prefer O3 because white has a stone at Q10, to limit the size of the lower right corner.
After this move I felt that trouble begins for White, this was the first crucial decision.
My opponent claims it was an aji-keshi.  df: Once you peep here you lose some options to respond to the corner invasion.  If you don't peep, you can make black live in the corner and perhaps connect under to your stone at l4. Even if you don't connect under, the black stones will be weaker.
Now that is a move that's either good or bad. Tend to the centre group first?  df: I would strengthen the center group first, unless you are confident you can end in sente here.  After this invasion black will be much thicker, so if he ends with sente, your center group will suffer greatly.
After choosing this variation I thought I made a good decision. Next move is problematic.  df: I don't like this result.  The corner is big.  Your group on the left side is much weaker, and you now have two weak groups on the lower side.  Your stones at E3 need another move, so you didn't end in sente.  It's very hard to find a way to attack the stone at J4 since black is so thick.  This is a bad situation for white, so your choice of joseki in the lower left was not good.
df: I don;t like this move either.  Black has one weak stone bewteen your two weak groups.  You need to attack this stone. Attaching to a stone is not the way to attack it.  Usually when you attach to a single stone you are trying to make the group heavier, so you can then attack two stones instead of one.  But in this case, the black stone is cuttting your two weak groups, so black already needs to save it, so there is no need to make it heavy.
This whole sequence didn't turn out as I expected.  df: now you are cut, and yuor group at L4 is weaker.
Now I still felt I had a good game.  df: yes.  You have settled two weak groups without giving up much.  Your left side still needs reinforcement, and black is thicker, so you are not doing as well as you think.  With this move you are out, but this shape is not as strong as it looks (as you find out later).
My opponent criticized this move, Q14 instead seems better?  df: I would look at Q12 to make some thickness to balance against black's thickness.  If Q14 leads to you running away on dame it doesn't gain you anything.  If you and black run out, you might want to make territory on the upper side.  In that case you prefer not to take the corner first and make black thick.
df: I don;t like this sequence since it lets black rip up your right side.
This sequence turned out bad for Black, I felt I had a won game now, is that correct?  df: it doesn't look like a won game to me.  Your left side is still weak.  You need to live in the lower right, so black should get sente.  You didn't get much territory on the right side. I think you are not counting the cost of your weak group on the left.
This move is not quite sente for White, which I sadly overlooked. I was hoping for the Wp3 Bp2 Wt2 sequence but Black has eyes elswhere or escapes.  df: black can cut your bottom group at N10.  Instead he plans to make you connect while taking center territory.
That hurt, I overlooked it too. I just barely lived, after the sequence my opponent said that he knew he could've attacked harder but he was afraid of a difficult fight.  df: this is the cost of your lower left joseki choice, that weakened this group.
Now instead of that he could've played B8 right? And then White tries to get out and Black's fate is unknown...  df: this is better - take the upper left corner when you live in gote.  This is an important concept that you need to understand. Make your opponent live in gote while you take territory or get thick.  Do not try to kill him unless the sequence is straightforward.
That's a strange move, dangerous.
At this point my opponent had a serious doubt between this move and C17.  df: since you answer it on a dame, he gets both.
I thought (again) that it is sente against lower right.  df: this is the move that puts you well behind.  Even if it is sente, it doesn't gain anything because it's dame.  You make this move because you don't want to get cut here.
df: black picked up a lot of points while you were focussed on killing the lower right.  Big groups are hard to kill.  It's better to plan to take your points while harassing a big group. Don't plan your game so it requires you to kill a big group to win.
Too soon, better answer at K17, right?
Bad, Black lives, better play P2 now if anything?
Painful to my left side group.
That was plain stupid.  df: Mistake.  Makes black stronger so he can cut you.  you are OK since you have the move at H5, but you are already behind.
Now my last chance seemed to be to play the (obvious!) move of White H5 instead. But I'm doomed anyway because I didn't see Black M7 coming.  df: yes!  If you play h5, you get your reward from attack the weak black group.  The the M7 cut doesn't matter.  You will still have to avoid giving black a lot of territory at the top when he attacks G17.
I resigned here.  Any comments/variations are welcome. Thank you very much for your time and have a happy New Year.
artboy598 [11k?]: well save questions for after the game when we review nada93 [7k]: why not c6?
good choice, aktive play
good choice again!
don't play tenuki! add one stone to the wall, and it's perfect!
ok, but I don't like it this way
why play here? w lives anyway better go back to D11 it ends in sente, so it does not matter too much
big point, may be bigger than D11
artboy598 [11k?]: i have a question after the game
ok, but R8 is good, too
nada93 [7k]: go ahead, i'll try my best to answer it  this point is ok, look at other options
artboy598 [11k?]: i'll wait
too calm
if you want to play here, play  R15 first
no! that weakens P11! You should do something to help P11
first play K5!
nada93 [7k]: btw i suck at handi games artboy598 [11k?]: what is btw?  BTW, I prefer not to chat
it is easier to connect. Then you are strong!        nada93 [7k]: by the way artboy598 [11k?]: oh
why play here? it does not help D11, the gap is too wide.
again, not necessary
better then capture because shortage of liberties for O5,O6
artboy598 [11k?]: slipped
a very thin framework
sorry, but now this move is good, but  not the best one
not good, it doesnt kill if you really want to play in this area, first play S3
artboy598 [11k?]: am i doing well?
nada93 [7k]: i think so
again: S3
here you are
you should read a bit more! it is easy to see the eye s7
too far away,          artboy598 [11k?]: took me a while to get it too nada93 [7k]: that move isn't a great one, it's too alone
this is really big!
you remember: a thin framework is now solid territory!  why?  you did not bother, but tried to kill two times, letting w live in sente
why connect?
why block?  all b stones are safe, all w stones are safe
the last chance to break throug
now you see only your own territory
very  slow move  look at variation (yours and mine)   artboy598 [11k?]: i was playing too fast
if you like complicated fights, this move is great!
oh, what a pity
w lives without problems
nada93 [7k]: i didn't need to keep playing this ko nada93 [7k]: i did because it came in handi to downsize you
artboy598 [11k?]: i know but i thought it was fun
nada93 [7k]: twas
STOP,  you are following without thinking! compare connecting  with L1
oh dear
artboy598 [11k?]:  i saw it, you were alive
why play ko?
tommatstu [4k]: hi
cpc [4k]: hi
cpc [4k]: i have really bad lag
I am not sure pincering is valid or rather a move starting from P16 like attaching at R17 would be better.  Theres alot of optiopns here u can look them up in something like kogos dictionary, i would assume a pincer could be possible if m16 was in a diffrent spot, but this starts a fight u wont, black attaching is a bad move.
Again, would R17 or hane on the other side be better? this is bad cant play this way w is in a weaker position you must yield to black.
Would R15 also safely capture the corner?  Is something loose like R14 even better?  i like here too, other then those 2 moves dont c much else.
This is a key move.  Should I have just played in the bottom or left?  If I was intent on reducing/approaching, was P9 a good place or would Q8 be better?  wrong direction completly if black goes for big pts u do too
hes given u something this way
I am not sure where this should be.... veyr bad idea make blakc stronger fopr no reason
Here I was trying to make some reasonable shape. very bad get away form black way too strong
i dont know what to say??? leave there alone
resign
very bad by black
SHould I just give up the stone and play L10 to be on the outside?
Should I just give up and play L10 instead?
Am I already doomed here?
Is there any way to live at this point?
i know how hard it is to understand direction, its what got me from the 2k to 2d range, but its really important to know when to invaded knowing how iis for stronger players then me, you gave black many stones handicap by someing in way too close, dont worry about reduceing if black plays chinese try and build yourself your only 1 move behind when it come down to it both of you will have huge moyos and try it that way. or of course fight distantly and lightly not every stone is important :)  good luck in future games hope this review helps.
Well, this looks easy as opening. Keep in mind though, this opening has a framework kind of aproach.
You have 3 high stones now saying I don't care much for territory. Usually you follow up with bold mojo moves.  A is quite common. B as well, just an approach move.
I figured to extend my influence further towards white. This was the closest I felt confident about.  ==================================  Right idea, but to low imho, considered your other stones. not a bad error at that level, (at mine prolly not as well)
This move surprised me; I am not sure what white was planning with this one (I've never seen sanrensei followed by tengen, though I know that doesn't mean it's wrong).  =============================  Tengen is to early now IMHO. I would answer with claiming the last big point on the upper side now at A. The idea is quite simly to invite an invasion of white somewhere and make profit of it.
Wanted to extend further in and threaten an invasion.  =============  Well you can always invade anywhere still and that move looks not forcing. If I'm white I ignore and play A
This also surprised me, though I think he was planning a large moyo off of his four hoshi points.  ======  Well, good move in my eyes. your F3 stone has still a weakness behind at h3 and looks all in all rather slow   I'm not sure how to proceed now, hmmm. We probably have to invade somewhere and try to not help white building his mojo. Not sure if we can wait with something like D
Should this have been a direct invasion at C3?  ==============  both are not that urgent and just help white maybe more then you. See variation before.  The white framework is on top, left and middle. He already didn't show much interest in defending that corner, by not responding to the f3 move.
This is where the first major fight of the game occured, and I'm not sure about the entire exchange - I'm sure I made several tactical errors, since I lost the entire corner.  =====  You cannot protect the corner. (Well actually you can take it back and give white the outside, but that will be a disaster, given your opening) The goal is to give white as little of the corner as possible and take the side.
I did hane at tsuke - but should I have fought for the corner with this tsuke, or given it up in exchange for the side with R15?  ======================  This is an error in strategic thinking. Why is the corner so important for you? In the opening, you put a stone at Q10 and neither Q4 nor Q16 show special interest in protecting the corners. So the gameplan would be to build your right side with R15 as you mentioned.   If the opponent invades in our mojo, the first question is how can we profit. There are 2 usual games when you play a mojo game.  1. Use the invasion to build a wall. 2. Keep the invading group weak and make your framework into terretory by chasing it around.  At first glance on that invasion, I would like to build a wall marked with the squares.
Geez, really playing hard there.  Well, first instinct is to extend from the crosscut, but I'm not really sure about this.
Well, maybe is ok so close to the edge and corner, but remember. In a crosscutting situation, have a thought first if the extension works
Prolly time to save the endagered cutting stones now
The cutting stones are to weak now.
This move I am sure was a major tactical error, but I'm not sure what would be better.
kinda lots of holes here
This move is really small.Would probably tenuki here.
Wasted move, there wasn't any threat yet.
White can just ignore that .. only 1 point Getting time to leave that be and take something else.
Probably should have defended my Q18 stone. via either P18 or P19.  ========================== No, the q18 stone isn't important at all. This is a little bigger but not much. Tenuki and invade instead probably. A or B looks interesting to use your wall.
I usually don't play first line moves that early ...
Is that really necessairy ? Maybe better to attack instead.
well he had another try because it worked on the other side ?
Problem with all this is now you lost the important cutting stone at q4. You secured around 18 points on the side, but your prospects on the lower side are decreasing.
Don't understand this move. A ladder breaker ? Maybe better at o3 then.
That move on the first line looks odd as well Leaves always that A aji
Odd move and not forcing you to do anything else there. So time to tenuki.
Go upwards, but playing in this area looks quite passive. The P5 group is really solid so you cannot attack it and I don't see all that much territory in that n10 area left and white still has a big framework.  Your groups don't really look in danger so it is a good time to attack.  You as well have that big wall there that craves to be used.
Tactical Mistake.
Very small move, there are only 8 points left in that corner.
Very small as well.
Very small as well, protects only 1 point.
It doesn#t look like we will make much territory here ... Maybe even leave m5 be in favour of an invasion. And this get's you into an akward fight.
Two weak groups. Not something we wanna have.
sigh, this whole procedure leaves a whole lot a cutting points. I just would like to end this fight and do something productive.  H4 is good though or you lose k3 or j4
That whole exchange looks kindof ugly.
Well ok you decided to give something up at last, but I think you should have done it a bit earlier
This had the desired result, but at a heavy price - white gained a lot.  =====  Yes, you conceded the whole center to white and secured like 8 points more on the right in the process.
scared move .. not needed at all
Maybe I'm missing something, but I don't think you have to defend.
Hmm, does that threaten anything ?
Hmm to small still.
Nicely done.
Good idea, but wrong move I guess
looks a bit early for that
No need yet.
No need yet either.
Again not needed.
To passive.
Big points I guess.  From a look at the board and a quick count I would say we are far behind, probably 50 points or more if we just close the borders now.  I don't see how we can catch up there with just reducing at A and B. So we really need to invade and live somewhere now to have the slightest chance.  I'm not sure about where the best invasion point is, we waited quite long for this, maybe to long already.
that's fighting for around 4 points.
A,B still big, but this looks like sente
A,B defenitely
Well, now he got it at last.
should be at A or B
Well done
Well, you probably misread here.
I don't think that corner is so closed off that it isn't worth a try.
Corner invasion still worth a try.
Don't need that or play at A at least.
peterchris [3k]: hi hf
apparently, this is a very popular fuseki. i haven't studied it before, but i've done some database searching to be able to comment
Roughly half the time white does this
Black plays like this for a significant portion of the remaining search results. In pro games, statistically white has a 5% edge. Of course that probably means little for us amateurs..
peterchris [3k]: How can I know whether to play high or low here - D9 vs C9?  The intention of D13 is to be able to make an extra line's extension, for the purpose of territorial efficiency. So, C9 is the proper move. D9, a move oriented towards influence, is at odds with the defect-littered shape of D13.
peterchris [3k]: Again, how to know, high or low - M16 or M17?  To answer this question, first you must ask yourself why you are playing the pincer.  With F17 present, the top becomes a less interesting area for both players. It is a low but very solid stone. If black attempts to develop, white has the backup to invade without any fear. On the other hand, white developing from that solid stone will be slow, as black will have no problem using moves like G14 & G16 to keep the top side restricted to a low position.  Instead, black should look to the right side. He has Q4, which is naturally inclined to develop the surrounding areas quickly. Joining R16 with Q4 in a framework would make a good strategy, especially with all of your stones on the left side being on the 4th line.   I'll illustrate some of these ideas with a few variations.  Your intention with the pincer is probably to prevent white from developing the top. Disregarding that the top is not the most interesting part of the board, the high pincer is correct for this task. As it is on the 4th line, it is easy to treat it lightly and to run away with it if necessary. A 3rd line stone represents more of an investment in the area and you would probably feel compelled to attend to it by giving it a base and replying to any attacks white uses against it. The only recorded case of M17 being used in the top pattern (with the white shape from game in top left) was in 1932, by Kitani Minoru. The strategy worked for him, but he was a top pro of the time, and it was at the end of the fuseki rather than near the start of it.
An interesting reply to your pincer
This should be good - playing P16 will more or less transpose into a position similar to the variations shown earlier where white counterpincers
pushing from behind on the 5th line, a very painful move for white to make
N13 is a terrible overplay
White is now a step ahead on the right side, the future of this fight is very uncertain.
The cut look like a powerful move.
this is as violent as it gets!
Playing this way is probably possible too, maybe even better. However you must keep N15 as your true aim, or else you lose sight of the true purpose of the cutting stones. You need to strengthen P10 in sente.
This is a very big move, but sente would have been better spent at N15.
I don't like this white move much!
This sort of move is highly aji keshi, unless you've read out a sure capture. See variation.
Already, the lovely yose at P18 is lost
This exchange not only failed to capture white, it reduced the liberties on O13. If white plays the atari at K15 next, black's group looks like a target instead of the thickness it nearly was
White probably has scary moves against top right to boot. You nearly had an easy win, now it looks like an uncomfortable game
This move is insufficient. You lost many points, you need to have a grander vision now.
White's move is ill timed, considering the moyo you are developing
peterchris [3k]: was this the correct direction?  It doesn't seem so. You build wall towards the center, but it is probably better to just block off white from the bottom entirely. See the variation.
Too soft
peterchris [3k]: i heard that whenever the opponent does not extend, that one should punish in this way.  was this correct?  Yes
This move is too soft. This allows white to protect K4.  K4 was a terrible overplay. It was a move played right next to your thickness with no real backup. After taking N2 in sente, your next aim should be to punish this insult.
How a madman plays
Not Sente
Powerful press
All good so far
This is something of a failiure. You should have stayed the course
White gave you a chance to make good
peterchris [3k]: based on the sequence that followed, it appeared that there is a mistake here somewhere.  maybe this move B8?
The mistake is trying to block all things at once. You need to read and recognize when something has to give. I give one possible variation here, but it turns out that there is an even better way (which is a variation given for the move after this)
This is a serious mistake. Can't see why you did not play C10, as this is just suicide
F6 - cuts off the live white group frmo te corner stone. Induces white to connect his corner stone to the nearly dead K4.
Oops!
peterchris [3k]: is there any hope for the black group at B14 now, or is this game over?
It appears, at this point, there is no hope
Two space jump here is unusual.  I don't like this move for W, it is too loose.  The normal move is at A.
A: I saw that the joseki is C16, but I think this one is playable because of the 2 spaces between D17 and G17. Do you agree?  Answer: No I do not agree with this move.  The reason is you are needlessly strengthening white.  He will play at E17 and you are left with the possibility of losing the corner.  If you had played C16 (which is the stronger move because your stones are connected and have more liberties) you leave with with weakness.
These two points could be problems for you later.
It is hard to pick a move here.
A: How do I respond to this? After the following sequence I felt Black is over concentrated, but I do not know how to answer better.  First off b10 is on the second line and we're on move 18.  This move from white is small and greedy.   The game variation I think is Ok, but I think you could do better if you simply just...
You are overconcentrated like this but it is not a total disaster because W didn't gain much.
Good move.
A: Is this the righ direction? If I play R17, White will probably answer with M17?  No this is not the right direction.  Taking the corner is better.
I'd hate to play this myself but it is rather solid and it is not necesarily a bad move but could be slow.  It looks like you are attacking whtie but you really are not because white has b17.  Even if you play B17 yourself he plays b18 and he gains eyespace.
Painful for you.
This is slack for white.
I don't like this exchange for white.  Needlessly strengthens black.
This move is bad.  It makes the right valuable for white by forcing him to add a fourth line move here.  I understand you wanted territory but what white gets is more than he should.
A high move here isn't good because you need a closing move.
Not the right place.
Ok so he invades although I don't know why because he has the territorial advantage if he simply plays A.    At times like these you cannot worry about your opponent sliding under you.  Here's some variations.  Pay attention to how a flexible strategy works.
This seems slow to me.
This is very very slack, it doesn't halt white from coming out at all and you won't have time to invade if j3 is split.  Please note: The two marked stones do not remove the 3,3 invasion, work it out for yourself.
A helped white and B is a redundant move when you consider C could've done the job just as well without strengthening white.
greedy.
Needless peep.  It removes aji.  For example.
This move is way waaaaaay too heavy.
Way too timid.
You can do better than this.
You'll have to be patient to attack the middle group, I couldn't find an absolute means of killing it.
Nice move.
[J] Hi, my name is Jorik Mandemaker and I will review this game as requested by white. I have marked my comments in the game with a [J], I've also added some variations so make sure you configure your SGF editor to show them. In case I use some (japanese) terms you don't understand you can look them up at http://senseis.xmp.net
[J] Black's last move is very unusual. D3 is the right answer.
[J] You can play C5 here.
[J] You can kill the lower left group. See the variation.
[J] This move is a mistake. Black just attached to your stone. If you let black play there again he could weaken your stone a lot. O16 is the right move. See the variation for the joseki.
[J] This is a very agressive move by black. He should have played at Q17 to punish your mistake. See the variation.
[J] Not a bad idea, running out with a weak group. But since black didn't play Q17 you still have the chance to grab O16 and Q17 yourself now.
[J] Better at O16.
[J] This move is quite odd. The normal way to approach the lower right corner is at P3 or P4. Alternatively you could attack the two black stones at the top. G17 looks good for that.
[J] I like this move. It's very solid. It's a good idea to not leave weak groups near your opponents strength.
[J] This move isn't very big or urgent. It's better left for the endgame.  The biggest area right now is the left side. Also the two black stones at the top don't have a solid base yet. Playing an attack on the black stones or playing on the left are a lot bigger.
[J] Again better left for the endgame.
[J] Now black beats you to the left side.
[J] The left side is big so I like the pincer.
[J] This is a mistake. Thanks to the black stone on C14 you have to play E16.
[J] What is your aim with this move? I suppose you are trying to build a moyo in the center. But this is very hard.  You would have to close the border at the bottom but also the border along the top. I've marked it with squares. That's not going to happen. Black can easily jump in and escape to either the top or the right group.  If you want to build a moyo you should try to build it on the left instead. It's easier to make territory on the sides than it is in the center afterall.  Intead of building a moyo you could also invade black's moyo. He has a very large weakness at H3. See the variations.
[J] Now black just patches up his weaknesses.
[J] This won't really lead anywhere. It's best to either move your group out into the center -with M13 for example- or you could play tenuki and build a moyo.
[J] Now your group on the top is shut in and black has gotten a lot of stones on the outside. The wall you have build in the bottom is rather ineffective.
[J] Woah! Big mistake here. This should definatly be at P12 instead.
[J] Good you can get something here.
[J] Black can now live by playing S16. If you play S16 yourself he would be dead.
[J] Black misses the way to live.
[J] Good.
[J] This move isn't very big. You should try to cut off the black group on the right off.
[J] The right idea.
[J] why defend here? Black has nothing. Cut him up at N11.
[J] N11 is still the key point.
[J] N11 is the last chance to cut.
[J] Black could have defended all his cutting points with L11.
[J] Don't peep when you can cut. Just cut black at N11.
[J] Cutting at L12 is  better. Black's right group will probably die. And even if it doesn't you should be able to build up a lot of strength and kill the stone on the left.  On a more fundamental level. You want to attack the lone black stone. Contact moves only help black strengthen his stone. Attack from a distance. See the variations.
[J] See the variation for black.
[J] This move is not needed.
[J] You can still cut at L12 allthough it has become hard thanks the black's new wall.
[J] Now the cut is protected.
[J] No need. Black can't do anything.
[J] This isn't very big. F1 is much bigger.
[J] This should lead nowhere, but black made a few mistakes.
[J] Black should defend at F14. There shouldn't be a seki.
[J] Seki in sente. That's a very good result. Black could have prevented it though.
[J] F1 is by far the biggest move on the board.
[J] There is no need to defend.
[J] Again not needed.
[J] And again.
[J] Nice.
In one of Lance Kemper's public lecture's, a position like this one came up.  I think it was the exact position, but not certain.  The question of R12 or not was the discussion.  If I remember the discussion, Lance told us a story about 2 professional players who disagreed on the value of R12.  Either too small or just right.  For me, I like how it develops territory right away, albeit smallish.    NICK:  perfectly normal.
This was interesting.  I could see how a typical joseki like attaching below at R5 would help white get the ideal shape.  On the other hand, white's group is already surrounded on the top right and black would get a solid territory in the bottom right.  Then again, it look like it would be in gote for black.  On the other hand, black could invade almost right away if white didn't defend right?  So it isn't really gote for black...  On the other hand, black could pinch I guess, but to what end?  That didn't seem very clear to me, so I chose the dullard joseki.
NICK:  like you just mentioned, this helps w too much.
Here, in hindsight, white could probably defend at P10?
If he ignores, can't black cause trouble at a later date?
Feels like the biggest move - getting a double extension from the shimari   NICK:  nice move....one possible worry is all the 3rd line stones you've played....every stone you have placed is on a 3rd line!  in theory, this should mean easy reductions are possible for w and b will be forced to eventually try dangerous invasion somewhere to win.
Am I being too optimistic here?
now here is where I make my mistakes often in games.  Here is my thinking:  If I do jump out to P12, white can connect under. R14 is a weak stone and certainly weaker than R10. So, if I attach to R10 to prevent R14 connecting, I can pressure the white group while building an attack on R14.   NICK:  Yes, these situations are always complicated...but there are easier ways to simplify....ie q13
NICK:  starting a running fight like this probably plays into w's hands....as all of your stones are relatively low and w's relatively high.  in fights, its very important to be mindful of this.
NICK:  B god a very good result...but game is not over yet due to w's remaining potential.  Still....b is big favorite after the capture of the marked stones and the the remaining weak group at the triangles.
NICK:  oh dear... letting w back into it....i would agree that w's potential is scary...BUT don't be fooled...the timing and support for F3 is not ripe yet....the bottom and bottomish right need to be delt with first.
NICK:  correct direction for w....but i would be very tempted to play h3 instead as w....j3 leaves a little too much wiggle room for a future rescue operation on behalf of b.
NICK:  probably not a good idea your b group is going to get pushed around a little bit, and while its not immediately killable, w is going to be able to strenthn the bottom-right-center area, helping both m3 AND q5 simultaneously.
Bad for white?  NICK:  it seems that this strategy tuns the game into all-or-nothing for w....w can no longer pocket territory with the hope of catching up.  instead...w's game will hinge on attacking this e4 group and saving his own at q6.
premature?  NICK:  i do not like this move for b First....with the huge wall at left...b gains some interesting invasion points at "1" or "2" second, it seems like the lettered area has the most long-term importance due to the weakness of the q6 group  by haing b make this type of move, it makes the game easier for w, and doesn't particularly help b.
NICK:  After this exchange....please notice that w has gotten to play m4...a VERY important point in helping the weak q6 group, AND has gotten to play L1 to start to make some eye shape (w g2 is also held in reserve for later)
NICK:  they say a corner enclosure is worth 15 pts they say a ponnuki is worth 30 pts.... i say that linking up two weak groups = priceless  i think this hsould be at p4
this was a wasted move I think  NICK:  looks like it.....if you want to prevent w from counter attacking, maybe best to just j5 here.  otherwise...more exciting plays is towards the right inbetween the two weak groups somewhere.
NICK:  why??? this is not a paricularly importnat direction right now your stones are safe...there are more pressing issues.
NICK:  you're only helping w now.
NICK:  b still has a lot of cash from earlier, but really didn't add much over the past 40 moves or so....granted, w didn't get much other than solidifying bottom, w did finally get to solve his weak-group problem at q5.
Did this help white in any way?  NICK:  No.  i think white just decided to try and use some of his dead p14's "aji"...except there doesn't seem to be any aji to be had.
NICK:  this whole sequence was a plus for b, because b got to play the marked stone for free.
NICK:  bad move for w not important enough...there are still shape defects around o8/n6/m6...as long as b retains eyeshape on left...b will just push around it.
The right time to invade?
my mistake.  I had forgotten what to do here - it's been a long time since I saw a move like this  A or B right?
NICK:  ouchies.
is black dead now?  NICK:  sure looks that way.
NICK:  should be at k11
I don't think black deserved all this!  NICK:  you're right about that!
NICK:  hmm there is...a super-mega-ko fight that i don't think w can win....but do you see it?
NICK:  haha....that ko fight is still there...
This looks odd - too far away to secure the corner.  Gi ven c10, C5 would be the logical next step.
This move looks weird to me, but I wanted to limit the amount of points gained as much as possible.
although this does seem to work, d11 gives better shape.
Should I have played here? Maybe I should've ignored that and played around Q10?  This is a reasonable play.  White will have to respond and as long as the local sequence ends in Sente Q10 will still be there.
I see this was a wasted move.
this is unnecessary.  the black extension is still connected without it.
too easy on white.  You leave all the possible targets open and don't put any pressure at all on the white stone.
this is not good play.     You have to asume that the white stones will survive, the goal should be to make more land than they do. The land will not be in the  center. Something like O17 is much better.
better to just connect at P17.
this pattern wiht cutting points at k15 and J17 is very weak.  You're not going to make the whole area you enclose into territory when the boundaries are so weak.
I wanted to play at Q10 but didn't...hmm. got too greedy I guess.
give white bad shape first, or just connect.
clearly a mistake, C18 would end the invasion immediately.  I f you can make an eye, you'll aways win over a group with no eyes.  There is no need to kill each individual invader.
even given the unnecessary Ko, white can't win if black just connects B17 to make an eye.
White should not respond - the Ko is woth infinitely more than this two points.
Hello!  Thank you very much for reviewing this game, I hope it is (a bit) enjoyable... Tapir.  Hi Tapir,  I have added some remarks and variations throughout the game.  Michaeljohn (inimino)
inimino: This feels a bit too close, Q11 would be better balance with Q16 in my opinion.  That is not to say this is a bad move.. just another idea to think about.
inimino: I am not familiar with this "joseki"...
Tapir: White misplayed the corner, I felt very comfortable.  inimino: Yes.
Tapir: Isn't this better played at C14?  inimino: Perhaps, but to me O17 is bigger so I think this direction is probably a mistake for white.
inimino: This feels a bit small.  I think the top side is now the biggest area, perhaps around L17.  If there were some risk to the D9 group, this move would make sense, but there is not.  It does give white an excuse to resolve the aji around E5, but for black this move does little in my opinion.
Tapir: This move surprised me, while I play the cap often, I did not expect it here. Is it playable?  inimino: To me, both K6 and K8 moves were a little bizarre.  I am not sure what the players are thinking about in this area, but to me the interesting part of the board is still around G17/L17/O17.  Even here as b I will tenuki and take the top rather than concern myself with the smaller things going on here.
inimino: Again I think black should play on the top rather than take this move in an area that does not represent points for either side.
Tapir: Is this a viable move? Is there a better one around?  inimino: This move looks a little unusual, but the idea to put pressure on the weak white floating group is certainly sound.  Another more indirect way to do the same thing would be to play on the top around L16 which also starts to stake out territory there while limiting the extension white can make from the upper left.
Tapir: I read about forcing at Q4 first, but didn't dare here... Should I? Is P8 reasonable?  inimino: I suspect that S8 is better locally.  You are trying to cut the white stones, which means this is starting on the wrong side.  In this kind of sacrifice-a-stone-to-cut-and-connect play you will end up on the other side than the side you start on.  If you can end up with a connection between Q6 and Q10 while white has a weakened group still floating in the center and an unalive ponnuki around R8, that would seem to be a good result.  Briefly looking at Q4 I can't see that it does anything helpful for black here.
Tapir: I now feel this is a mistake, since all ladders are working for Black O8 might be the best way, but I'm not sure about. After White O8 the center group became solid.  inimino: It seems that O8 is not a complete disaster, but on the other hand, it is an odd result.  If you are going to play O8, it seems that P8 did not make sense.  To me the most obvious and likely result of P8 is this position, so if you are going to play P8 I think you should follow through and treat is as a sacrifice.  If you play O8 here, then I wonder why you played P8 at all.
Tapir: Is this move reasonable?  inimino: I still think the top is much bigger.  White can play at O5 to connect, or can run out, so if white plays around K17 now I think this move will look a little silly.
Tapir: Can White play the wedge at H9 instead?  inimino: The variations after H9 are a little involved but it is quite easy for black to make life or connect, so H9 is not much benefit for white.
inimino: If you are concerned here about the life of the black group, I would try to live or connect in a more active way.  Perhaps black can try P4, J2, and O6.  This particular move just feels a little passive.
Tapir: Better at O17 next?  inimino: Possibly.  It makes better use of the stones at N10 and O11.
inimino: This is not a bad result, but the question now is, how to deal with the situation on the top side?  It is still open enough for black to invade easily, which is the most obvious and may be the best approach.
Tapir: Slow?  inimino: Yes, and encourages white to close the top, which is much worse.
inimino: A little ambitious, but clearly this move throws a challenge to black, who must now find something special to stay in the game.
Tapir: I now try hard to bring myself into trouble... :(  inimino: I would probably prefer to play a little differently here, but the way to invade or reduce is probably a matter of taste and individual skill more than anything.  The best advice would be to avoid this difficult situation by playing in this area on black's previous move.  Regardless of how you handle this, however, it is pretty likely that this invasion will live.
inimino: Rather than simply connect here, I would play at least E18 first, and then probably make sure the top group is alive.  If white cuts, the center black stones can still connect to Q5.
inimino: Clearly, the stone at M14 itself is not very interesting.  Much better to sacrifice it.  K11 leads to an interesting fight which seems better for black than the game line.
inimino: Perhaps L17 directly would be cleaner here.
tapir [3k]: re  inimino: Why not play L18 here and try a ko?
Tapir: Black maybe alive now, but this invasion was not gentle at all. How could I have done better?  inimino: I hope I answered this with the remarks on previous moves.
Tapir: Very unexpected to me. the result was very bad for black. Q12 next, or forcing with M10 / N12 possible?  inimino: N12 is natural, however your Q11 is also playable, your next move after Q11 was the real mistake.
inimino: Q12 was too passive, N12 here seems correct, see variation.
inimino: Obviously a bad result for black, the error seemed to be not thinking about how to use the aji of the black stones at L11 and L12.
Tapir: More reading required... Can Black kill here?  inimino: I think not.
Tapir: Can Black do anything if White plays G4 instead?  inimino: I think not, but there are many mistakes in this sequence, and black gives up some amazing opportunities in the next ten moves.
inimino: At this point the white group is dead and the game should be over.  Note that black could also have played H1 followed by N2 here.
inimino: Another huge mistake, here black gives up about 50 points.  If black plays G3 instead, not only is the white group killed but white must also defend against black N2 which captures 11 stones more.
Tapir: Shame on me...
Tapir: After several crude black endgame plays earlier, how is the balance now? In my count the game is about even now.  inimino: I agree the game is about even.
inimino: This move is very bad.  Black must now play K11 and L8 immediately, and can again create a ko which is very unpleasant for white.
Tapir: Trying to make the best out of M8... however...  inimino: A complete disaster for black, though the K11/L8 aji is still there it seems both players were unaware of it.
Tapir: Unnecessary?  inimino: Yes.
inimino: K11 now would win the game for black.
inimino: This is nothing, and lowers the possibility of the connection at O6.
inimino: At this point black removed the possibility of the ko, so the game is almost certainly for white.
inimino: This is nothing.
inimino: Why not P19?
Tapir: Losing more points here?  inimino: Yes, move 317 was a mistake.
[EV] Pushing from behind like this is generally regarded as a little better for B, as he makes fourth line territory.  In this game, I think it is quite playable for W, anticipating a strong attack on the two marked B stones.
[EV] I would play one space to the right, farther from the stronger side, at either of the marked points.
[EV] This captures one stone on too small a scale.  The resulting W position will soon be over-concentrated.  See previous variation for an alternative.
[EV] B got a good result up to here.  This turning move is tempting, trying to make W even more over-concentrated, but I don't think W really has to answer, so the timing seems wrong.  B should instead defend the lone marked stone, and W should tenuki to attack it.
[EV] The B corner is much larger than the W side, for the same number of invested stones .  W compensation is the weakness of the marked B stone, but I do not think this is enough to make up for the territorial loss, since B now has sente to defend.
[EV] This is playable, but it seems needlessly complicated.  Why not just defend directly?  Any of the marked points would let B settle his stone fairly comfortably, without giving W too much additional territory.
[EV] I would attach on the other side, to capture this stone on a large scale (see previous variation).  After this attachment, it looks like B can live inside the W moyo (see next variation).
[EV] W swallowed up the B stone along with a large side territory.  The game now looks close.
[EV] Playing at A would be normal and fine for B.  The game sequence lets W jump out ahead on this side.
[EV] Connecting solidly would be usual and good, but going for the maximum like this seems playable too.
[EV] Good timing.  I am not sure who gains more from the continuation, but letting W turn here would be bad, particularly after the last W move.
[EV] The last few moves were forced.  This W move is also large, but does not seem necessary.  The W moyo is geting narrower, so I dont think pushing here is big enough, even if B answers.  Invading the upper left side while it is wide open seems more urgent.  W can split the side, with room for a two-space extension in either direction, at either of the marked points (probably the higher move is a little better).  Another possibility is shown as a variation.
[EV] Here the fighting gets too complicated for me to analyze properly, so I will only add a few more comments and variations.
g4: Obviously wrong. I think I had to take a stone.  [EV] Probably true, but it would still be a difficult fight for both sides.  You give two variations which end badly for B.  I added a third which seems better.
[EV] This clearly turned out badly for W.  B could just play safely from here and win without more fighting.
[EV] B should simply atari at L14, instead of starting another dangerous ko.  Losing this ko lets W back in the game.  No further comments.
Review by John Rae BGS 3kyu                Generally white starts well, in fact I think takes the elad in the middle game. however neglects to keep a key group alive. The whole game turns on a ladder capture - which is played through to long and so destroys a good white position.
JR:  I think I'd have left the lower side. White has a group that's pretty safe, take the opportunity to split black's stones apart somewhere else
JR: The trouble with this sequence is that black seems to have solidified as much territory as white and if anything improved outward influence. I certainly don't feel white has started to catch up the handicap stones to any extent
JR: After this sequence black has a strong position and white's position on the bottom is mostly third line. Black can keep it down fairly easily.
JR: Jumping in here befroe black gets too strong is the right idea. Whit'e ideas is to split black into separate groups and attack them, not necessarily to kill but to reduce them.
JR: Black lets you off here I think
JR: Pushing through the gap is natural, , black really should not let this happen
JR: Well white has established the side nicely. Black has a lot of space on the top that will cause problems. both sides  ignored the weakness of the marked cut.   I think white might have taken sent here instead.
JR: Black's descent is good general policy but doesn't get anywhere here. The alternative would have given more outside strength.
JR Black's move is not sente so white correctly takes sente to reduce the moyo. Good.
JR: Good, black's move again was not sente. White has had two very good moves in a row and significantly reduced black's potential.
JR: Black missed a chance. and I think this would have been better at Q17 since this way still leaves the 3-3 invasion for white.
JR: Necessary for the side. Not sure white can afford to take the time to do ti though.  Perhaps it is worth risking that black will not spot it not since he didn't before.
JR: The thing about handicap is you expect your opponenet to make slips to let you catch up. This is one of them.
JR:  Its good because black replies to it but in general terms it leaves a few weaknesses on the top for white.
JR: Good. White is well established on the top
JR: Good, white is established on this side as well.    Black has all 4 corners  White has some good side territory. The position is good. I'd possibly count white as ahead
JR: oops, problem coming
JR: You can't aford to miss the ladder until so late. Its not just the capture is so much bigger its the fact white loses the postion on the side as well. This is a 30+ point swing in the game
JR: Its hard if you lose a group like that when giving a handicap.  The huge extra potential black has from the whole side is the big problem.   R11 looks dead but ideally white wants to pull it out to minimise the loss due to that ladder.
JR: Good, you don't want white taking that point.
JR: This move is of little worth. White is a long way behind. solidifying territory will not help, so either resign or find something to attack. its all or nothing time.
JR: Well if black insists on leaving you that nice juicy group to chase go for it :)
JR: black looks like living.
Can't say that E3 is wrong...but with both d16 and q16 being high e4 is more common.
Is tenuki good here?  NickSib:  seems fine to me!
seems like w is asking for trouble.....w has no friends in the area and his closest strong groups are all on 3rd line.
this move is too defensive...in a sense, you gave w a sente reduction...it is true that w would like to aim at c12, but you probably will have to be more aggressive to take advantage of the game.
very slow.  your last move was not very aggressive (it was very defensive).  To play two defensive moves in a row is horrible.  I think a play at 'A' is far more aprropriate
let's pretend w gets a wall at the circles and b gets a wall at the squares....w's territory is clearly much more solid and w can easily strengthen his weak group AND reduce b's territory at the same time...so this is bad timing/placement for a reduction.  probably better to build up even more strength and try a more severe invasion rather than reduction in this area since w is harder to attack.
good for w.
probably n3 better.
this is an OK result for b...although w played very timidly.
Should I be attacking the w group in the middle?
OUCH! b may look ok...but now w is slightly ahead in points after komi and has lots of prospects (o17/r14 looking like nice approach moves for w)....the only advantage b has on the board is still slightly weak d10 group...b needs to find a way to take advantage of this flaw or might as well resign.  attacking this group can be hard though, as their is no immediate area that black can turn into profit nearby.
b recognized that o17/r14 are excellent points for w...so he tried to take them first.  In this case, I might be tempted to try to make up some ground more quickly and form larger double-wing corner and put some minor pressure on j17 group with L17
this next move is a very painful move for b...if b takes A...w becomes stronger at right and q10 stone beocmes even weaker...if B, then w eats up entire B corner and b's right site looks like it can be more easily reduced...this move in game, threatens to build center influence at the expensive of w taking points on right side...though the reason why is not entirely clear.  perhaps to support a grand attack against d10 group?  let's hope so.
This seems like a slow way to play.  How to handle r16 better?
let's evaluate....w is looking to take something like 39 pts + komi...b is looking for something like 46 pts + komi...still a close game.  unfortunately, b is going to play r18 on the next move and w is going to have sente in a half-point game...sente is still huge at this point so b still needs to find place to take advantage somewhere...looks like d10 group is only place to make up those points
a big point, for sure, but perhaps better at m17( playing m18 allows b to possibly make some points facing q15 wall)
OK...b saw that m18 was low is attempting to take advantage of it.  w over-extends into b's area from a weakish group.  this is the moment to take control of the game until the end!
Here's where I am lost.  NickSib:  This seems like most obvious move...but you might be willing to try j11 as well.
this peep is probably premature...not because w might not respond...but because you may end up wanting to peep at n11 to take profit/make eyeshape later on in game OR w might find a better move than m11 to fix shape.
this is not as urgent as you may think.  probably better to now attack left-center weak group with e9.
wow great result for w....now k11 is looking a little weak (its not REALLY weak yet, but a little closer)...w has reduce all of b's potential, secured eyeshape, and given d10 group another place to run if it gets into trouble.  definitely a bad result for b .
big move....but lets evaluate....b is at about 49 points, w is at 47 PLUS komi AND sente.  b seems to have fallen even more slightly behind.  BUT, there is hope!  b still has the weak group at d10.  at this point, this may be b's only real resource and key to winning the game.
not entirely necessary but slightly helpuful.  would have been better at j13.
ah finally! although, g11 looks like its a good shape point, it might easily turn into a liability for b and allow w to escape.  let's see how it plays out.
b gives up the stone? for f14? b didn't have a plan after playing f11 did he?
finally the cut works
what? w still not alive yet!!!
w still not completely alive yet in center left!
b should only have played the previous moves if 1) he knows it will end in sente for him and 2) threaten to kill.  seems OK so far...
Nice sequence!  here's another chance to win game!
what? why not p8!!!!???
almost every single w stone on board is completely safe now.  b has almost no prospects.  g10 group can't even be attacked anymore after j10
let's evaluate. b has 60ish points, w has 53 points plus komi...so still even game.  BUT w STILL has sente.
This move is OK if R16 is at Q16, but now it allows a perfect approach for white
a good direction of play.  with 5 B should have approached at F17, or enclosed a corner
usually B should not omit R14 unless both C10 and H17 are tighter to W's corner stone
W corner is strong so you can be more aggressive with C12 here
this move is a bit wishy washy, not a strong attack on R8, not building territory or any obviously useful thickness. I prefer to press at O4 then come back to the counter pincer at R10. bend before you stretch!
b should push out before he crawls here
B is helping W complete a wall without gaining any territory. This is a  mistake. B should leave it alone in case he wants to poke at it from the other side to reduce the center
L9 is not attacking you, but you are not gonna kill it straight away, so ignore it for the time being. B is quite thin on the left, so maybe press him down there then attack the middle stone from higher
hard to find the best way to approach these stones. This way you settle both groups and secure some decent points, but most importantly finish  in sente. so it is OK
even though it is only move 89, every group on the board is close to settled so it is a good time for a quick count to see how you are doing.  solid territory for B: 22 pts in upper right about 10 on the left side maybe 14 on the bottom and about 16 on the top for a rough total of 62  for W at least 14 each in lower and upper left about 15 in the upper right, and you can't count on more than 10 from the lower right total of 53 secure points plus sente  so the game is quite close and you have a choice Either play solid safe and secure and try to win in yose (you chose this and played fairly well, losing by just 0.5) Or be a little more aggressive
B should tenuki here. W can reduce only 5 more points here
[ZD] I tenukied, as I did not like either of the two variations.  klin: It is the player's choice.  No problem.
[ZD] Here I was not sure.  Pincer does not seem to achieve much, and I did not like P17, although the variation suggests that it might be good, actually.
[ZD] This seems to be a mistake, though, see the variation.  klin: Again, either move is OK.
[ZD] Mistake, obviously.
[ZD] Again, I was not sure what to do now. I considered A or B.  C seems to be small at this point.  klin: C is not a good choice now.  A or B may be slow.  Consider the possible next move for W.  W may play atG5, if B H4, W J6.  W can have a huge influence in the center.  Therefore, B can consider a move in the center.  Even, invade the left side by D7.
[ZD] In the end, I tried to do something about whites left-side moyo.  Is A the right way to do this, or is there some better choice?  klin: This move is also possible.  A little too deep though.  That's why I suggested D7.
klin: W let B settle down too easily.
[ZD] This might be a mistake, as it weakens A.  klin: C3 is huge in territory.  Hurting A a little bit is the small price to pay.
klin: B is successful.
[ZD] Just playing A would give less weaknesses.  klin: Yes.
[ZD] I was not sure what to do now.  Probably something in lower left corner is more urgent.  klin: LR corner is more urgent.
[ZD] Submissive. but the variations for A give white nice position to the left.
[ZD] A mistake, I have too many weaknesses on lower side for this move to make any sense.
[ZD] I probably had to fix with A, instead.  klin: No, O14 is bigger now.
[ZD] This looks like a mistake to me.  It is definitely big, but it allows me to fix some of the weaknesses of the lower side.
[ZD] Still, this looks unpleasant.  I felt lucky to get away with as little damage as I did in the end.
klin: B can play at K3 and chase W out to fight.
klin: W has gained a lot.
[ZD] I am not sure about this move.  However, I feared white could threaten to run with A, and use this to create a wall enclosing large territory in the center.  klin: This move OK. No comment beyond this point.
klin: Did you consider G3 cut?
[ZD] This was a mistake from white -- too small and does not really achieve anything.
[ZD] I am not quite sure what I achieved by this move, though...
[ZD] White did not have to give up the ko so early, but I seem to have more ko threats anyway.
richbest: ---------- I used this 'Moku Hadzushi' Joseki just out of curiosity from the Hikaru No Go anime ;-)  To me it seemed that this Joseki is quite aggresive given the closeness of B1 to W2.  I intended to be aggresive (rushing to plant 'my flag') since this is my first game against the highest level of GNU Go without handicap stones.
richbest: ---------- I was shocked when White started approaching this early in the game.  Do you think this early approach necessary from White's point of view?  I was wavering in my decision between protecting my corner or claiming the last South-West corner.  If possible, could you also put your own variation to resolve this conflict?  thesarge: theres nothing particularly surprising about approaching here. since you played on the 4-3 point, theres no urgent need to protect here, you can go for the corner if you want
richbest: ---------- I decided to claim the last corner, using the star point.  Had I tried to protect my South-East corner I would most likely use the joseki variation added on the tree. I learned it from 'The Game of Go'.  However, I was not quite sure with the following:  - would White follow the Joseki as what I've learned  - would it go well with the 'moku hadzushi' I used previously  - would it be worth to let White get the sente this early in the game after the joseki sequence (see the Joseki variation)  thesarge: the opening is very...well open. its hard to say what white would do.
thesarge: p4 should be played at r5
richbest: ---------- Is there actually some tricky tactic for B1 to get out of White's group?  thesarge: i cant seem to see any clear way to live, your best bet is probably q2
richbest: ---------- I put this marked stone as a base to assist B1 in future battle-for-territory, since B1 seem to be placed too upfront in the North battlefield.  Is this necessary?  thesarge: its fine as an extension from p17 and an attack on the lower right white stones
richbest: ---------- Is there a standard Joseki to answer W2?
thesarge: this is a standard enough response
thesarge: the joseki move here would be at b3, otherwise white can play there and take the whole corner
richbest: ---------- Out of curiosity, can this state already be called the end of the OpeningGame?  I put B3 and B9 in order to help the marked stones stay alive.  After W4 attaches, I do hane to B5 in order to drive White away from the South-West corner and South area.  Actually I was thinking of driving W4 to the South but I had no confidence due to my lack of thickness over the South area.  I was wondering too whether I should have done double-hane with B11 over W10 or just cover my South area as what I've done there to avoid complications.  Well, at this point should I consider that White has mostly won over the South-West corner?  Any way to turn that around?  thesarge: like i said, the easiest way would have been to play at b3 before white, double-hane would have just been throwing away a stone, he would have been able to capture immediately. instead of securing the bottom left you secured the top right, so you had to trade. With whites stone at c10 it will be hard to invade at this point, so your best bet is to work elsewhere or try and contain it, for example at e10
thesarge: dont make open triangles! black 25 should be played elsewhere, this puts very little pressure on the white group in the corner, and does very little to extend blacks group.
richbest: ---------- Interestingly, the whole board now looks like a heart shape with its lower arteries ;-)  W1 started the 'Journey to The Center'  I tried to answer it by building wall on the South-East corner to prevent White's group from gaining influence on the center using B2 and B4.  B6 is used both as 'stopper' and 'wall.'  After going through the game, I'm wondering whether I should've put B6 one step to the marked White stone to prevent expansion to the center earlier.  How should I have put my B8 to deal with center extension by W7?  B10 is to prevent W1 extending to East area.  thesarge: this is why i suggested possibly a play at e10 earlier, to weaken some of whites influence here. Instead of trying to block off whites advance with black 8, I would possibly try invading. At that point, whites formation is very open, you could try invading at d13 for example.
thesarge: the last few moves of yours allow white to seal off his giant territory, while giving you only the chunk in the top right. You may have been better off invading instead of defending in the top middle. (see my variation on black 33)
richbest: ---------- Well, I ended up splitting the center.  Should I have not execute this strategy?  I'm still having trouble answering the kind of 'pushing' move like W3, whether it's safe to 'kiri' (cut) or follow (like what I did with B4)  thesarge: your best bet in these cases is to look at whites possible responses and go from there. the hane left a small weakness but since you have a large wall here it should be fine. Since there is such a large open area on the top left, cutting may have been appropriate; it would of course lead to a big fight on both sides, but since you seem to be behind already, it would be a chance to take a lead.
thesarge: on the other hand, black 41 is too late to cut and can easily be caught in a ladder.
thesarge: i would not play black 53 here as it just gives white an opportunity to play here and weaken your stones at F15 and F16, probably matching at K18 would be fine
richbest: ---------- I put B1 with this kind of splitting idea in mind, as well as to invade White's West area, push him to the side and gain some area.  Frankly, I saw this kind of strategy from one of the pro games discussed in Janice Kim's book.  However, I ended up building wall that's too thin to do the initial job.  Any suggestion probably, on where I made mistake, the initial splitting idea or the way I execute the idea (the stone placement or lacking of threats in the other areas of the board, i.e. preparatory moves)?  Seems that White was trying to compensate his probable lost by pushing me away from the center to the North (W6 to W10) and to the North-East (W12 and W16)  This is also partly my mistake for not securing my Eastern area before splitting White's area :-(  I was also wondering why White put W22 there.  In the end I put B23 out of curiosity of White's strategy, since W22 would actually put the marked stone to death did White not put W24 there.  My bad with my obsession...  thesarge: i have no idea why he played at White 22, thats the problem with playing computers, they often make stupid moves for one reason or another.
thesarge: this is too small and again open triangle.
thesarge: again too slow, you need to make some room to live
thesarge: the outcome is already clear here: you have 1 liberty, he has two
richbest: ---------- You must be wondering why I made the last three prisoners donation to White right?  Well...  After my rather stubborn extension to the North-West and center area using my lettered stones from 'A' to 'C', I was so surprised with W1.  For some reason, I was considering whether the numbered White stones were actually aiming for the vital points of my North-East marked colony to make 2 eyes.  I just couldn't resist but planning to capture White's crossed stones using double snapbacks and some 'living-eye' principles.  However, I miscalculated the number of moves and it ended up incomplete :-(  So do you think that White had something in mind (other than expansion to the North-East corner) with W1?  Again, obsession???  thesarge: probably just an invasion (it worked) before you played the last stone in the snapback, it should have been obvious what the outcome was. read at least a move ahead and dont be stubborn. dont play moves that you know wont work, you just pay him to strengthen his position
richbest: ---------- After my attempt to capture White's stones ended up in prisoners donation, I was concerned with the influence of White's marked stones to my crossed group of stones.  Therefore, I decided to vie for two eyes on the unexpectedly too small - as it turned out in the end - North-West corner.  Any better idea on what I could've done?  Before B9 though, I was really questioning myself on why White had put W8 overthere.  To me, I could just make two eyes by putting my stones on the lettered area from  'A' to 'C', so why wasting on W8?  Is it due to some subtle fight over sente?  Honestly, I haven't understood yet the true art of fight over sente as I still am struggling with movement counting and territorial counting...  thesarge: Actually, after White 8, it becomes more difficult for you to live. Here if white plays at B, i cannot find a way to live. you need to play at A, C or E19 first. Since white plays elsewhere, he eventually gives you the chance to play there, but for now your group is in trouble
richbest: ---------- From now on, I'll try to comment on each move I made until arriving to the next 'chapter' after the territory is quite well drawn out on the board.
richbest: ---------- 'If hane, then extend'  That's what one Go proverb says, so I extended Southward to secure my rather thin wall of marked stones.  Since I've lost some territory on the North-East corner due to White's lettered stones, I decided to protect my wall rather than my North-East area...  thesarge: this was necessary to connect the middle line of stones and protect against a weakness
richbest: ---------- Since I've failed in reducing White's Western area, I decided to connect Southward with the marked stones, while gaining territory if possible.  Actually, in the end I couldn't get as mush territory as expected.  I have overestimated myself, or rather underestimated White...
richbest: ---------- Well, someone must stop White's expansion
richbest: ---------- White seems to see my plan.  I struggled for territory here.  Eventhough the possible territory gained reduced considerably, I stubbornly went on with it.
thesarge: not playing at H12 would have cost you two points, i'm pretty sure you can find bigger moves than that
richbest: ---------- So far I have been trying to secure my area.  After W1, I was thinking whether to go to the South of White'A' at position 3 or just attach it diagonally at position 2 as what I've done.  What do you think could have happened did I put it at position 3, anything bad out of it?  After W5, I was also questioning about the consequence of letting Black 'B' in atari while creating tiger's mouth at position 7.  thesarge: dont worry so much about losing one stone, getting a better shape or playing a bigger move is much more important. As for playing at C9, your group in the middle is still very weak and this would probably be too risky
richbest: ---------- B2 was intended to prevent Southward expansion
thesarge: Black 133 could probably be played at T15 without any problem
thesarge: black 143 at N15 would be better
Is this joseki alright in this situation?  janr: I think black got a very large moyo.  It may be better to choose a joseki that put's more emphasis on the corner or the lower side.
janr: I don't like this move as it is aji keshi: If white just answers at A making fourth line territory, the cut at B is covered.  E.g. Black looses the possibility of forcing at C, or squeezing white with a cut at B (cariations)
Pretty reckless but black seemed too powerful at the moment any other way?  janr: I think that after white A, black has still the weakness of the cut at B.  After blacks's defensive move, white can reduce the moyo blacks only territory).  Also, with the omission of A, all good joseki variations for white in the corner fail te work.
janr: I would prefer A. which is slightly more flexible.
janr: I would prefer A, B or C.  A and B make shape while C escapes. The game move protects the cut (but it's already protected) and does not much more.
I prefered life over running
janr: it would be better if white had not played the stone at A if he was intending to give it up to live locally.  Maybe he changed his mind underway, but changing mind is always expensive.
janr: I would prefer to play actively enlarging the moyo rather than trying to capture two stones.
janr:t it doesnt work.  While made a lot of points here.
janr: It may be sufficient for white to simply answer the kakari (at A) and next reduce blacks territory.
janr: as there is no potential for white in the direction of A to extend greatly, and Black A is annoying, I would prefer B.
This joseki turned bad  janr: The variation joseki may be an alternative for white.
janr: if white answers with A, Black B isnt a forcing move later.  Moreover, cutting through around B becomes a possibility for white.
janr: I would prefer the attachment at A.  It is important for white to reduce the moyo.
janr: In this way, black can build an impressing moyo, and leave the situation in the upper left flexible. It may be better for white to make some shape in the center near the moyo.
janr: I wonder whether the (bad shape) cut would not give a good result?
janr: it is important for white to continue the attack and in this way reduce the black moyo.
janr: the hane on the top of 3 stones is painful
janr: it's only 8 points gote.  the three stones serve no useful purpose
As you can see 0.5 lost  Thx in advance for reviewing this :)
This is fine, its a low move so this stone is defensive, and you need to play defensive because d16 (high attacking stone).
I think this is extremely aggressive, too much so.  Pros play at A or B normally.
This is a bad move, you're not taking into account blacks d 16 stone, and you're playing an attacking move without getting a chance to play the closing defensive move.
So this joseki isn't very good for you because of this move.
This is indeed overplay.  You are counterattacking but again c13 has no support and e6 is quite strong.
This is aggressive but not as much as it could be.
This is overplay
Well first off you have bad aji as you saw later in the game with this shape.
AP: In hindsight i should have played this move at E12 i think, is that right, or is moving into the center with G9 correct afterall?
Cant really attack black with a big hole in your shape so
Yeah this sucks
you have a problem with leaving weak groups behind when invading, and this is a problem i see with a lot of kgs two kyus.  You're going to be split and if you dont get sente h 16 will be attacked.  I know you want to attack the black group but it will be more effective if the groups surrounding him are stronger
I dont think this is the right move.
Well first off your corner group in the corner is ko, your top group is dying, and your side group is small.
this is aji keshi especially considering the ko in the corner.
That was all aji keshi on blacks part but thankfully he pulled himself together and go this move.  You mentioned you thought he let your group live too easily, but thats not really a concern here.  Your group lived with 8 points whereas his outsides moves with q17 are by far worth more than 8 points.  He doesn't care if you live, he has more points.
This is gigantic, otherwise black cuts off your center group, plus now j14 is bad aji for black.
so slow....
ridiculous
Wow, now black is the one creating weak groups everywhere.  One of them is going to just plain die.
I like this move
But not this one :)
I dont like q 8 its broken shape for you and quite heavy.
AP:  This move was very difficult for me to respond to, and took me a long time to think about.  I was considering H2, M2, K5, and K4, but eventually i settled with K6.  Where would you have moved in this situation?
Right where you did.
AP:  Was this move the mistake that lost the game for black? or did it come at a different time?
This board makes me cry for black but you need to wach out for h6 :)
good :)
i would never let him have this move
but there is nothing wrong with safety in positions like this.
yeah total overplay
After this from here on out its just endgame and thats not so important.
AP:  This seemed like i only had one response option, but in hindsight it seemed I should have played P11 first
rs220675 [2k]: hi
I don't think its possible to obtain a loosing position from perfect chinese opening... Actually here the opening is about to end.
This move is unreasonable in any event. Your respons makes definately  superior position, hane on s4 is also possible and would be even better, since white has little he can do there.
black lead is not as clear as it would be with r4.
This is wrong. Byt this move you say "I want the area on the right of it". But what about the left? Your influence stretches as far as the f3 stone and now you play like its not yours. Also it has no impact on the white position on the bottom left.
W still needs a move at c14 first. This calls for an invasion.
The moyo may look large, but its still to open, I like the white's territory around the sides more. Two two-space jumps are no good - its a big weakness.
This is too deep now, calls for a kill. The R9 stone is strong as it is and doesn't need a reinforcement, so q10 is nor forcing and B can attack immediately.  There are many posibilities for invasion and many require deep reading on how to exploit the weaknesss around k7. But the basic weaknes is q13, some combination like m11 pressing and then q13 should be enought.
Therefor this is wrong - you must see its overconcentrated.
normally this is regarded as a very light shape, but here I would leave q10 as forcing and play even lighter, m10 for instance.
this looks nice, i just wouldn't like leting white to play r13 now. But I don't like giving up the right side - you have to have your mind on territory, since white has more if you don't count the o6 area, which is not yours yet.
good spirit
You can play it any way you like, but keep sente and strong positon.
this is wrong. The o17 stone is not usefull for white anyway with n15 on its place, you dont need to capture it. Also with k16 you don't make any points. Moreover you make white play into the right side, helping his weak stones there in effect.
Now the p14 cut gives white a much better prospect to make eyes with the o12 group.
ohohoh, what are you trying? To make 4 points? Where there is still a group to attack?
Looks fast, but it throws away too many points.
good direction, but too far from the group. better to prepare a little(The second variation)
Bad move - when you are this strong around, you can go for the deepest invasion possible, instead you go for a reduction. But the truth is that with e17 there isn't much space to do anything, which is why m17 is so bad.
Now you still have a chance, but the k14 group is about to die, so the chance is low.
the black group is dead, white was just nice. I will end the comment here. The main reason why you lost is quite obvious - you focused everything on building a single territory around o6 and therefor lost on the rest of the board. Another thing was the play on the top - making a very strong position where it couldn't be used. Thirdly were too soft on white, not making any invasion
rs220675 [2k]: thx achille [2k]: thx
Jon:  Moving out the corner stone is pretty passive in this position, it allows white's marked stones to make an overly comfortable base on the left side.
Jon:  White gets too large a base and a nice cache of points, so you can be happy with this result.
Jon:  Alternatives for this move are discussed in the variations.
FM: This was the hardest moment of the game for me. I can think of the A,B and C possibilities, but I don't see any really good continuations here. Maybye it's just because of the r7 pincer?  Jon:  From what I can tell, it's the pincer, since black can double approach any of them, so I would consider moving out the corner stone instead of the pincer.  At this point though, my preference would be the kosumi at A.
Jon:  The kosumi at A looks slightly better to me since black can poke around with the wedge at B next and try to force you out of the corner.
Jon:  Because white's resulting wall will be rendered useless, I'd consider making the atari from the other side.
FM: this result feels really painful even with the r2 ko possibility  Jon:  Agreed, this is why I would prefer to avoid building the outside wall and try to take the corner instead.
FM: another difficult move to make. I wanted to live there but was afraid of getting killed so I chose to run away  Jon:  It's tough to live in there with the marked stones so close, so I'd prefer to use this move and run away too.
Jon:  I'd be inclined to omit this exchange, it strengthens black and pushes him towards your escaping stones, so to avoid this, I'd prefer to jump out directly to A.
Jon:  Now it's become clear that the 1-2 exchange hurt white.
Jon:  This is pretty slow, I'd like to exand at A instead.
FM: the upper side is probably too big to start this ko - anything played there will add white ko threats.  Jon:  Not totally sure what you mean, do you mean that white should extend there first?  I would be interested in making an extension to around A first.
FM: q14 was too big as it is sente for black and gives him the super attacking extension on the upper side. I played this move because I misread badly - I thought I can kill the big black group if I surround it from the centre.  Jon:  Agreed, black's bottom stones won't have much trouble living, so responding to the ko threat would be best.
FM: the game is over now. It's quite shame to misread like this but I liked this game anyway. The game had 199 moves and in the end I resigned, but nothing really interesting happened after this as black has a safe win now.  Jon:  No worries, mistakes happen.    Thank you very much for allowing me to comment your game! I hope you found it helpful, and if you have any questions, please feel free to contact me.
W has no idea what to do. Standard is to play C/R10 (or on the 4th line) or C/R14.
I like the response. W is lost here.
logic respons.
B must respond to J17 with K17.  now the right upper side is open. The idea of the Chinese opening is to create a large moyo. R6 doesn't fit b should go for a double wing with Q/R10. See var.
Too early, stay calm and play S4, N6 and then R11. See var.
Now white enters in what should be your moyo at least based on your opening.
This doesn't do much. w could even tenuki. Bigger are K17 since w is not alive he will have to jump out or F3/C6.
B could counter pincher here with C10 which is a nice extension from D14. B can still take the corner or connect.
Better at E4. Don't be afraid of the peep or cut.
The shimari lacks depth because of K16 being weak. K17 is sente after which the shimari makes more sense but also C11 is big. Imagine w playing C12...
overconcentrated.
ouch...
and again ouch.
w tears up what's left of the chinese opening.
Typical 'thank you' move. See var for how to attack.
nope, b should keep w confined to the side,  play K4 and connect his weak center group. See var.
w can cut with J3 this is big!!
w should cut. See var.  The score here is quite even. B can still invade at B10 (yes! try to work it out)
wrong direction w F7 builds territory.
If you want to use the dead stone remember that there are more points to make on the side then in the center. See var.
very painful...
difference of 25 points!
overplay w can't cut.
What was the plan here ?
w is about 16 points ahead here.
very good the points are on the side and it's sente.
no, the other way around to keep sente. L17 and then L18
good move.
almost. see var.
bad shape and unnecessary. Read it out.
good move.
expensive mistake by w. Simple snapback..
very good and sente.
not here..
see var.
overplay read it out.
unnecessary. read it out. You're giving sente and points away.
impossible b should tenuki.
why not H1 ??
unreasonable.
Now you have made something simular the kick, and this sould be a good exchange for Black. Why the kick is good for black is since it is no stone arond (A), and white still needs to protect a weakness at (B)
White did not protect the weakness at (A) --- See examples
Wrong, this is a big point,   you sould attack the weakness at (A) or extend at (B-C),  I would extend to (B-C) before attacking the weakness
I felt I was playing wel up to this point. I planned to break up his right side with my next move. *** i.), Now there is no right side. ii.) You sould extended at (A) insted of (B), then it would be even.
I answer his approach with O17, per my readings in Learn to Play Go Vol.II. *** i.) I have not read the Learn to Play Go Vol.II
I dont think this is the best way to answer his attack. If your stones was at (A) & (B) it would been good. --- See example how I would played this out.
I felt I had enough room to live in the upper-right, so I went to make sure I had enough on the left. I think I should have played near the lower-middle or right-hand star points instead, or F16 or C17 in order to break up his area more. *** You have no problem living at this points, because you can very easy escape.
This is a bad move. With this move you help white make a wall against your marked stones. *Im pretty sure (A-E) would been better.
This leads to a massive upper territory on his part later on. *** That is not sure at this point, you can still invade at (A-D)
I still think you sould done one of the moves that I showed in #Move17.    But this move is okey, if you want to play passive.  Now white cant cut your stones. --- See example why
He gets the right star-point. It would have been much different had I played here as I said earlier.
Trying to break him up so he doesn't claim the whole right side. *** (A) would been better. More pressure on marked stone.
I think I could have played R8 here to split him again.
This is also okey, and you still got (A) to invade at since your marked stones are not weak now. But this would been better if the group was at (B-C)
Again, white have alot of weakness in his group. (A-E)  -- Try to remember good shapes and bad shapes. (C) will make a good shape.
Trying to surround and stump his right territory. *** He still got the same weakness in his groups. Try to punish him. See #Move25
Invading, finally. *** This is wrong, Sure, you get the corner. But white have marked a to big upper left side moyo. And you cant let him make a great wall there. (A-B) would cut (1-2) connection.  --- Again you leave a weak group See exaple what white could done
I was worried with his 34 play. I figured I'd have to fight well to stay alive. I did, but lose it all in the end due to a stupid blunder. *** You can still escape at (A), and after the escape is done you can cut at (B)
I felt I was okay in the upper-right at this point. *** i.) You are far from okey : | ii.) You have to escape
i.) If you felt that you was okey, what was the reason behind this move? ii.) #Move38 helped black iii.) see exaple how you could have played
I was trying to split his O15 stone from the upper-middle group. *** With this move you sould have tryed to ecape, and later try to attack the marked group. But you cant attack the marked group without a stone at (A) But white can still easy cut you. See example how.
I know, due to my stones placed as they were in the lower-right, that the corner was mine. White was making me prove it, which I felt I did well.
I held it!
Just to make sure... *** No reason doing this move.
Trying to reduce White. *** Dont try to reduce white if your stones are weak. You got some very weak groups.
Here white could punished your over play with (A), White was being nice.
Good exchange for black, but white was being nice.
I saw E18 and saw the ladder! Unfortunately, it doesn't work. I was so happy as I played my next stone. *** Hehe, I know, the ladder does not work, try to read it before you make the move.
...and then I realized it was for nothing. *** True.     But it is still your turn. did not loose a lot.
I dont think you needed to protect there.
Now this group is even more weak then before.
You had to protect the cut
Black is starting to fall apart.
I didn't even realize it was atari on C8. I wanted to stay connected to my D6 group.
Just for influence later. *** Hehe. Se example how you could rescue your marked weak stones very easy.
In this move there was no reason : )
Trying to sketch some area out in the lower-right middle.
I felt that I could get more territory in the middle, but it didn't turn out that way.
Here, while I couldn't see it, I felt sure I could kill the D17 group with this peep. *** This is not possible, you help white
Now, I wasn't so sure.
Was going to try to cut in at J17 and try to kill still...but I was realizing quickly that it wasn't going to happen.
Now my J17 pair is cut-off.  From here, is there anyway to save them? *** No, and this (A) kill had no hope from the start : )
Still trying...it seemed right at the time.
Now it was clear I was just giving White stones for free. *** Agree, you helped white making the marked wall, and now there is even more pessure on your stones on the right.
The sequences involving the stones around the middle-left was quite confusing for me, and led to my problems. I was very confused in this part. *** Marked stone cant die.
Cut-off! I figured, "No problem, I will just connect to the right side."
I figured I could still connect at my leisure to the right (the stones at K10 to the M8 area).
Trying to cut into White's potential territory around H5/H4. *** No reason doing that now. Cant do anything big what that move, better to do (A) and (B) --- Se example on (B)
With 60, I was afraid White was going to cut into my area around N7. In the process of trying to hold some territory there, I didn't realize I was getting totally cut-off from the J10 group that needed to connect to the lower-right to live. *** i.) J10 group is alive. ii.) the only dead in the middle at this point is Marked stones if you want to escape with (A) & (B)
(A) would been better --- See example
Okey, Now you had to give away your marked stones, in order to let the other live.  --- See exaple how
Is there anyway to save my K8 group? *** Yes there is. See example.
A desperate hope that he would not play G12. *** This is a move that sould been saved for later Ko
From here on out, and over the previous few moves, I was just trying to limit White's territory where I could. I couldn't see any opportunities for invasion against White. I was also trying to extend where I could. *** I agree.  END OF REVIEW
Trying to get the S6 group. I try to cut whenever it is available. Even if it doesn't work out, I learn something about fighting usually. *** Yes, I do that myself, try to fight, and see if it was bad or not, but here if you used to seconds you would easy read that this group was save.
The big blunder. *** Yes, if you had played alittle slower you might have seen in. Ofc, it was not easy to see this misstake.
Double atari.
Dead in the upper-right. I resigned.
CZR: I prefer a move in the marked area to this one (see move 9 comment).
CZR: This opening does not favour W.  The reason is that B gets 5 of 9 big points while W gets 4 of 9.  In a game with a komi of 5.5, W would have compensation for this, but in this game where the komi is 0.5, W can not be satisfied with trading points in this manner as B will get the last one by default.  W should look to complicate the game from the outset.
CZR: The top two fuseki (opening) priorities are:  1. Stake out zones of territory (usually corner, then side, then center). 2. Place stones at highly influencial positions on the board.  This move does not fit in either of these two catagories.  Rather, it attempts to attack B in the least important area of the board --- the center.  And it is gote, B can tenuki without feeling threatened.  B has good responces to any continued W attack.  See variation of move 12.
CZR: B wisely tenukis.
CZR: This exchange (1-2) is in B's favour.  His position is strengthened by your contact play and works well with the marked stone.  Instead, W can think about answering at 'A' or 'B' or with the pincer at or around 'C'.
CZR: W stones are not working efficiently.  This play makes the marked stone redundant.  W should look for an efficient move that satisfies the fuseki priorities.  Some ideas are marked.
CZR: This B move is difficult to place in a fuseki catagory.  B's intentions are vague.
CZR: White enjoys this exchange of territorial 5th for influencial 6th line.
CZR: Leave non-urgent fighting for the middle game.  There are bigger moves to make (like the one B makes next turn).
CZR: This is too close.  A touching play like this will help B to settle his stone.  If you want to pincer, consider 'A' or 'B', but even these are difficult for W because he will be locally outnumbered.
CZR: You need to defend the cut you leave at 'A'.  Play out some of the variations to confirm that B can capture something by playing at 'A'.
CZR: You are attempting to kill a nearly settled group.  It only leads to B strengthening his stones and you getting nothing in return.
CZR: B now projects great strength while W gets 3 points in exchange.  Not a good trade for W.
CZR: This play is worth 1 point.  Save it for the end of the game when there are no bigger plays to make.  Instead, maybe reduce B's influence by defending your cutting point at 'A'.  Or invade the lower left corner while it is still open.
CZR: Sente, but there are bigger moves as well.
zomberg [15k]: so am i 2 take yr not just
zomberg [15k]: a goomba but a para-goomba:)
CZR: Compare this move, which does nothing really with a move at 'A' that defends your cutting point.
zomberg [15k]: sorry im feelin silly..
CZR: "Don't throw good stones after bad."  Go proverb.
CZR: Worth nothing.  That stone was already yours.
CZR: I don't think this is a good place to invade as you'll be immediately weak after B plays his next move.  He has no weakness in his position now.  Instead, think about an invasion at the marked positions.
CZR: Ask yourself: "Why am I cutting here?"  Don't just cut because you can.  This is the beginning of the end.
CZR: All you have succeeded to do is give yourself a weak group.  For the next 40 moves, you try to defend the weak group you gave yourself.  Better B play would have captured this weak group in a heartbeat.
CZR: Your only hope is to join your two groups.    I'll give my final commentary here as their is enough to think about here already.  1. In the opening, think about the priorities and make moves along those lines. 2. Remember, attaching to an opponent's weak stone typically makes it stronger.  Therefore avoid touching weak stones when you don't have to. 3. Have a reason to cut.  Your cut must leave your opponent with a weaker group than you, or it only serves in his benefit.  Keep playing, and try to read out your plays even a couple moves and ask if the outcome serves a purpose.
zomberg [15k]: sorry fone call
zomberg [15k]: good job thought it was worth a try
There's nothing wrong with a 3,4 opening point. I am circa 12kyu and tend to steer away from these as the joseki are complex - and it's easy to make a costly mistake. But by playing these you will learn !
this is quite a strong opening - though the expectation is that black will approach at A or B (or either of C or D). If black c or D then white A.
Black has played a san ren sai opening, the 3 star points. Good for influence, not territoiry oriented.
Though I'm not a super dan player, white 6 looks odd - better at A which woirks well foir an attack on a black stone near 6, or B if you want profit.
8 is low, A gives you better shape on the botton, B is a direct attack on 7.
you now have let black get easy life - playing A is the only way you might frustrate him - but that is more yose than opening. 4 and 8 are not fundamentally alive - and there is a weakness around C13.
10 is low - lots of stones on the third line. You should balance 3rd and 4th line so you mix ability to get out into the centre ("there is no territory in the centre" means you can destroy any attepmt by your opponent to make territory there.) A ius better than 10.
Was this the right response to black's invasion on left side? No. Attack from your weak side  - which is the D3-F4 group. A might work
now black is very strong and D3 - F3 is relatively very weak. Note the word relatively. What would you do if black played at A?
you have a very invoiting hole at A for black to enter and cause havoc. - you will have two weak groups - bad news.
Ahh! 16 is weak - you've jumped into your oppenents strength. It's difficult to claim 15 is the weak stone.
Was this move necessary? Or should I have extended into the center
black's response to 18 was not normal - but that's life. However Black stakes out a big moyop on right side . 22 is not a bad moove.
the idea of a moyo is to tempt the opponent to invade - and he either lives small or dies. what ever happens, you gain strength to attack .A would be better.
I noticed that I had nothing in the center and was trying to somehow extend. I'd be tempted to play a big moyo move at A with B or C as follow-up.
Again, not sure if this move is necessary, played it just in case. Maybe lost points because of it?
Attempting to cut the two black groups  Beware you are well inside black's moyo (the line between 5 and 23 creates a sector. If you are inside (black's side of) the sector line you need to live. Sitting on the sector line or just outside is a way of reducing your opponernts territory whilst getting out  - not getting killed.
Wasn't too sure If I should have extended towards center or fought
Attempting to stop black from taking so much area in center
you need to keep runnning - so 46 MUST be at A
50 - you need to think about life. A may be better
Another attempt towards center
Wasn't sure If i should have played J3 or J4. Hindsight suggests maybe J4 o J5 might have been better?  56 at J4 much better - you are just inviting the atari. Also is this big? you may be better off playing X, Y or Z.
Again, not sure if this move was necessary, or if there was a better move perhaps? I considered extending to K7 but wasnt sure if I could survive
another attempt to seperate black, was hoping to eventually invade top right area
R
Realized here I should have played J10 and that my white pieces barely have any room for eyes
My attempt to try and connect the best I can
Attempt to secure maybe more area so I can make eyes
black 83 was poor - what would happen if he'd played at a? (N12?) - you die all over the place.!
Attempting to reduce black's lead
again, not sure if this move was necessary
Made a mistake...
Should I have perhap blocked differently instead of J16 to secure more area?
plaing 142 at N13 not o13 is better - you gave up a free point of territory.
I think D18 was where I gone wrong horribly. Should I have played B18 instead? What should I have done?
R:A or B is  a little better than C. The reason is the black stone (B5) is target of  white.
Is this the correct spot? R: As  white stone can live with A or B extesion, so the spot  may be good one.
Should white play at A or B rather? R: I think B is better, for  white 2-stones  are week than 3-stones.
R:  As 5 stones are not living,  I recommend A move.
R: As left corner black 5 stones are not living,  I select 12J ( like just before pointed). However, your choice (16N) may be also good one.
R: As left black 5-stones are not living,  A is better than actual 26 move like in the branch.
R: As  white 3 stones are too weak, they must be  discard like in a branch.
R:Rright  black 3-stones are living, on the other hand, right and center black 2-stons are not living.  Therefore, the first choice shoud be a connection (A orB) of two black stones.
R: As black 3-stones are living, b29 move was bad. Now white had a chance.
I tried to split large scale. R:Now black became difficult. Black should　discard central 2-stones and shoud live left 5-stones.
Mistake? R: Yes, White should select A, because right black 4-stones are living.
R. This Ate is very bad move, as shown in the branch.
R: As left white stones are living,  capturing of 3 black stones is not urgent.  Attacking for 5 black stones is much important.
This result is retarded. A is stupid now. R: As the  stone（A) was a keystone､　white  did mistake move in upper field..
Time to fix.
R: 56 move was overplay.  Black should connect own weak two separated big  stones, as shown in a branch.
I thought this stone can help my group on the left. R.
Overplay, i think.
How about A or B for black? this is a complicated joseki situation o.o R: B is better than A or actual move as shown in the branch.
I wanted to make ma group stronger by attaching.
I missed this cut at A.
b
Now it becomes ugly. :( Poor white.
White is missing black's A-B combination. R:Yes, white ibecame difficult situation.
WTF is this move... white foolishly thinks about attacking the black group oO
White is surprised >_< I read the sequence up to L3 (aiming at G6) and hope that it works. If white dies on the left, i will resign. R: Black attack (J13) was keen and now victory of  black  is clear.
White finds hope.
Now the game is playable again. Phew! R: White right territory became larger
R:This white move is bad, white missed that black can play A.
White plays endgame and hopes for the best.
R: This move was very good
Tried to create more sente for white later, but probably mistake.
Maybe overplay... but both players are exhausted (making the game more weird) and white cannot lose too much with this move, i think.
R: white suddenly  became prominent,  the reason is in connection (8D).
R: A branch move was a little betterr than the actual game for black.. Thank you for your presentation.
I think black missed this move.
Subsequent moves omitted.
mentat> black should consider to play in the bottom right corner.
mentat> B is too low. W is too thin.  W will need to exploit B's top. And me must be aware of possible invasions in the left side.
mentat> maybe this was too close.
mentat> now you are in a dilenma. If you pincer, D14 might be too thin. If you step back, it might be slow.
mentat> this move is too thin. only 30% of move.
mentat> this is only 30% of a move.
mentat> nice move, but W is probably still invadable
mentat> these 3 moves were bad, that's why W is still fine in the game.
mentat> read more carefuly before playing this move.
mentat> huge mistake
mentat> white should resign now.
mentat> W is dead in gote.
mentat> this is a pass.
mentat> read more carefuly.  This is my last coment.
Was this move here a mistake?  Perhaps I should have instead crawled down the bottom side, or played at Q10 on the right side...  (TB)  Johnny5:  This isn't too bad of a move from what I can see.  You manage to seperate his stones and you prevented him from making a base on the side.
Johnny5: Here B has no territory on the side, and just a small string of stones that he will need to worry about keeping alive later in the game.  W may think about threatening b by playing H4.  This gives the possibility of gaining a larger territory.  (See variation)
This may have been too passive; perhaps a more agressive play on the corners?  Johnny5: This isn't such a bad play.
Johnny5: This should have been a big indicator to you.  There is no way you can allow B to have such a moyo on the 4th line.  It should still be fairly easy to invade his territory at this point.
This was DEFINITELY too weak. Bad move. Should have stretched along the bottom.  (TB)  Johnny5: This is actually a decent forcing move.  It threatens his string of stones at D5 and gives you the possibility of extending even farther on the bottom side.  (See variation)
Johnny5: B has taken the initiative and gotten a very large corner.  Looking at SE you can see at this point B is ahead by almost 40 points.
Johnny5: Jumping into a corner like this is pretty much suicide.  You simply don't have enough room to make 2 eyes.
Johnny5:  Okay, here you were able to gain a small amount from the exchange.
Johnny5: Way too small.  Think big.  Be sure to look at the whole board position, especially when your opponent doesn't play in a place that you think is very important.
This move really kills it for white. Perfect box formation at the top. I would have needed to invade immediately after this play, and, even then, there would have been no guarantee of success....  (TB)  Johnny5: Invading after this would have been extremely difficult.  Reduction looks like the only sure option and even then, you won't be able to reduce much.  Jumping in at L16 before would have allowed you to run out if you thought you couldn't form a base, but now b could easily close you in.
EmTom: I would prefer to play this move at A. It makes your corner more solid and attacks white as well.
EmTom: A good move. The other possibility was to approach white corner at A.
EmTom: Hmm... I don't really like this move. If white plays at A it is hard for black to answer. It seems that k16 wants to build towards the center but theres not that much potential there. I think it would be better to approach white corner at B right away
Nisse: So far I think I've done well. Now he invades me and throughout the game I handle invasions badly.  EmTom: I'm not sure about this position. It's quite unusual. I think it is about even...
EmTom: You have terrible shape in the corner now. White can still reduce it greatly with a slide to A. Your marked stone seems totally out of place now.
EmTom: It looks quite bad for black... white gets nice territory and blacks influence is limited by d11 stone. Maybe you should have cut white and try to attack it? It looks difficult tough.
EmTom:  This is odd... So close to a strong black group. You should swallow this stone easly.
EmTom: Ok... this doesnt work at all.
EmTom: This move doesnt do that much. I think you should have invaded white corner at A or defended your territory at B. You also could have reduced top right which makes your marked stones stronger.
EmTom: Ooops. Wrong joseki.
Nisse: How should I have played this corner?  EmTom: You shouldnt have played here at all. Up to r18 its a joseki. White takes corner back, black gets ponuki on the side. If you can live on top its ok for you but if you cant its a disaster. I think its impossible to live in this situation. See another joseki in variation on move 65.
EmTom: a suicide...
Nisse: I was very pleased with the outcome of this fight, and thought I would win.  EmTom: Yes. I believe white is behind after this blunder. You can't get overconfident though.
Nisse: How should I have handled this invasion?  EmTom: Well you shouldn't touch this stone for sure. You play tsuke when you want to defend not attack. I would try to force it to connect to left side group. This way black can get some cash in the center.
EmTom: You try too hard here.
EmTom: White lived in sente which is very bad for black. Now white can reduce the center. Suddenly blacks advantage dissapears.
EmTom: Way too leate for that.
Nisse: Again, White get the better of me!
Nisse: A serious oversight on my part that cost me a lot.  EmTom: Yeah... looks like game over now. :(
EmTom: center is too small. Its better to defend the corner.
EmTom: Finally ;)
Nisse: Another invasion a didn't counter well...
[EV] This move is not bad, but it seems a little slack to me.  W needs to get a better result than B on the right side of the board, to compensate for the two extra B stones on the left side of the board.  I would prefer something more active like S9, preventing B from settling his group.
[EV] Again this feels just a little soft.  How about pressing more severely against the top stone?  B cannot afford to cut, so I think W gets a  better result than in the game.
proper shape? maybe p18?  [EV] This move takes some corner territory, but I think it is more important to stay ahead in the center and to keep up the attack on the side.  B cannot take the corner without weakening his other stones, so taking the corner is not urgent for W.
[EV] W has secured the corner, but at the expense of greatly reducing the effectiveness of the two marked W stones.
Let B connect, to take sente?  [EV] It is better to keep B disconnected if you can.  Pressing B into a low position is not very satisfying in this position, since W does not make much center thickness.
at that stage I thought that W had a positional advantage  [EV] W has a local advantage on the right side of the board, but that is natural since B has two extra stones on the left side of the board.  I do not see any really severe attack on B, so I think the game is still even.
maybe just N7?  [EV] This move is natural.  Letting B push out through the W enclosure would be bad.
B should be alive at right side due to T10-sente-move Though B is completely encircled W's group (P9) is not that much stronger than B's one (P13)  [EV] The N13 group is still pretty weak.
[EV] This move seems a little too aggressive.  B is still weaker here than W, and this stone could easily end up as dame.  The W response is forced and good; I am not sure B wants to induce the following sequence.
[EV] It is better shape to push once more in sente.  B cannot allow a double hane, so W gets to build up extra strength to attack the center.
B encircles a nice area in lower left side.  [EV] I do not think B has time for this.  The center group needs to escape.
to defend against P3  [EV] Too slow.  Giving B this exchange in sente is too good.
Really needed?
Solid, but severe enough?  [EV] No, W should attack the entire group, not cut off a single stone.  See previous variation.
Q18 just better, and bigger... But I think that I misread, and W is still alive after tenuki  [EV] Yes, Q18 is much larger and perfectly safe.  Letting B take R17 in sente would be bad, even if W could live.  Comments end here.
i play two starpoint opening by habit, maybe to see as much follow-ups as possible.
then i often tend to invade in the middle...
> This move is questionable. It does not pressures white, neither does much corner work.
and always make the two point extension.
> W is not so weak to attack, so attack might backfire.
is this whole sequence really clever/necesarry?  > Black did not gain much from this, and W made a lot of points.
> this move is unreasonable as bottom is unsecured > notice also white is not under attack
> Black's wall is not beeing used. > Walls are not meant to build territory, they are meant to attack
>now it is good time to invade corner. maybe black should've just hold it
> This leaves black with enough room to eyes.
> W was easy on black this way.
> nice move
> nice too.
> This move might take away aji away from the corner
> this is unreasonable.
i still seem to improvise a lot...  > as I said earlier, a bit of tsumego training would help you both.
> so this was bad.
does this count as a reduction of opponents territory?  > this is allmost a pass. or 30% of a move
i can imagine there are bigger points on the board. A, B, C or D maybe?  > This spliting move is nice, but W has a weak group in the top. > should focus in strenghtening it before attacking.
> W's top and right side were hurt
> This also hurts W's top.
> nice move.
> this might help more B than W
> W's weakness in top cost a lot. Black is strong and connected everywhere.
> this might have helped more B than W.
> This helps more B than W
> this is really bad for W.
> The cut that did not worked, started to work.
> this is small, look alternate sequence.
> Took some time to play here, hehe.
rs220675 [2k]: u2
rs220675: As I understand this is a joseki up to now. Is it possible/good move here not to finish the joseki with A like usual but to play tenuki (like I did)? And then I don't understand why many very good players don't use this simple joseki, why do they use other ones?  MR: The move "A" is only joseki for white after black o4, see variation. In the situation given, I would want to play O4 directly as white to build up the lower side. I don't think that tenuki is a good option for white, as black can seal in the white corner with O3.  You can look for the different josekis and variations in Ishida No 2. The reason why your variation is not played by very strong players is that their opponents do not cooperate with Q6 like your opponent ;-)
rs220675: Is this a good move?  MR: *After* you build up the bottom - yes. It is one possibility to build up the left side while paying the price of giving territory to the opponent in the upper left corner.
MR: I would play O3. If black does not answer you can directly cut with O4, N5.
rs220675: Is Q10 playable or a mistake?  MR: Did you read out the upper right corner? My first impulse would be to play R15.
rs220675: I prefer fast development. Therefore K4 was more imprtant than to secure Q18 which is in danger (actually I didn't recognise it at all :)). Would you have played K4 also or better saved Q18?  MR: K4 is unimportant in my opinion as you allowed black to play N4 before. Locally, F3 looks better. However, this local area is not the hot spot of the game currently. Jumping out with N10 or similar moves seem to be much more important to me. Also, the upper right corner needs an extra white move.
rs220675: What do you think of that move? I wanted to keep black under pressure with that move so that black won't live to easy and to quick....  MR: I would prefer to play with the white group at the top, first idea would be F16. The black group is not that weak, black can utilize the white weakness with e.g. F17.
MR: ? White should play with his upper left group. This would also be consistent with the goal you mentioned for move 34.
rs220675: Any way I can kill the two black stones at L18 or did I just misread the sequence? Could I have made something better out of this fight?  MR: No, the black two stones are not dead. After black K18, white J17, black R16 black has five liberties while white has only four.  N18 was definitively a strange move - extending a "dead" group and make the opponent stronger in the direction of another weak own group ... As mentioned before, playing with the upper left white group directly would have been better, e.g. F16 or K17.
MR: ?
rs220675: Certainly a mistake to prevent black from living in the corner. Or is it ok? Which move would have been right or which moves would have been right?  MR: I don't think that you can kill the black group - so tenuki is best.  I think that there is no "one good move" in this situation. One idea would be to play around tengen - to extend the framework in the lower left and to support Q10.
rs220675: Here I have no idea what to answer black. I answered at C6 which I consider bad because it helps the weak stone to deveop. Now I would prefer C8 as an answer. What do you think?  MR: I can understand that you want to rob black the base. As you already mention yourself, it would be better to do this without attaching, e.g. with C5. One problem with this is the black option of a double approach with F3 - if you defend the corner afterwards, black "separates" K4 which leads to large scale fighting. An alternative is the simple move F4, see the "standard joseki" as a variation.
rs220675: Ok, from here it was just a game of two 2k's, it's not interesting anymore.
MR: I would continue to chase the lower black group. Locally, F13 does not help with respect to shortage of liberties.
MR: ?
MR: Black resigned.  I feel that this is a strange stage to resign for black, first one usually resigns when it is ones own move and second this is not a situation where "something" was just decided. It is true that the game is much better for white, but there are still some areas to start trouble - a) there are some forcing moves against the lower right corner, b) there are squeeze options starting with G13, c) a caping move N10 forces white to act with Q10 with the option for black to "get something".
attacking him there only makes him stronger. It doesn't help w. There are far more urgent places on the goban (West and North sides)
black is very strong, and many of white's stones are now useless
very small move that abandons the initiative to black. It was time to tenuki
no use at all. E16 is the classical continuation and makes a much better shape.
this doesn't help.
huge mistake. The black stone will be more a burden than a help.
gote move that will allow black to build a massive wall and go for white's north side
the emergency for white is now the N12 area, that should be attacked right now. This attack will help black to build a wall facing the middle, which will serve him later
the following moves are small yose moves, and the "big empty area" should be played sooner by both players
black plays here first, and gains a huge advantage from that.
this move (and white's next one are too slow. W has a good base on north and should use that. The points that will be taken from the capture do not match the points that black wins on the east.
black terrible mistake won't be enough
White is in the lead at that point.
both players make little mistakes in the last part. the triangle areas are worth no point. There is no interest in playing them until everything is finished, which it is far from being the case.
white loses much of his advance on that one. The best is to sacrifice the J15 stone to take back the initiative.
black then plays the important endgame sente moves.
no use answering that. Still points to make on the board. As the game is getting thight, those points are going to be worth much...
There is no way white can save his group from ko from now (though he can maybe trick black into misplaying). This is the moment where white loses, but white also loses from its poor strategy, which enabled him to win only with a mistake of black.
this move makes you lose the game by itself.  I agree it's tricky, but you should be able to see this kind of things if you make more life & death problems (goproblems.com)
white has to ignore that threat, because he has nothing to match the value of his endangered group in NW
CG: The "normal" move in professional games is E3. This narrow pincer does not really keep the balance between the opposing 3-4 points.
LL: a rare variation of this "joseki"...  CG: Black has no reason not to play the usual josekis starting with C3 or F5.
LL: now, it's no more a "joseki" !  CG: Yes, black must of course play G5.
LL: which color is best, now ???  CG: I would prefer white in this position.  You propose cutting at H5, but this would be too slow - white may even ignore this cut. Depending on the situation (e.g. if white plays A2), black might also prefer the forcing move at G6.
LL: a pincer which is also an extension of the white formation...
LL: [...] responds with 'a', 'b', 'c'  (...) (joseki). [...] 'd' is unfavorable with this pincer, as the pincer is in the way of White's extension. (Kogo's)  CG: But in this position,white gets over-concentrated, too.
CG: This is too slow! You should not be afraid of the cut and take the initiative by playing A2 or F7. Even if black gets the opportunity to push through at M5, he can only capture M6.
CG: Good!
CG: Now Black D13 has become sente! Playing such a narrow extension in gote is painful. You cannot win if you take the second-best move on each side!  It would have been better not to play M5, but you should still play K17 or R14.
LL: but, black seems to lead in the development... what was white mistake ??  CG: As I explained, M5 was the bad move.
LL: is this move OK or NOT ??? it seems that white helps black to develop the upper side...  CG: P14 is bad since yo cannot attack R12 efficiently. R17 is better in this case.
CG: This is to loose. You should not give black an extension on the side and play R9 instead.
CG: Black should play P12, of course.
CG: Since you can only get one eye in the corner, you have to move out. And if you have to move out, you should not play S16.  If your group is safe, you would prefer to invade at R17, wouldn't you? S16 is aji-keshi!
CG: The marked exchange is a minus for white.
LL: black is now clearly ahead in the game... what was the main problem in white's strategy ???  CG: The triangled stones are over-concentrated (M5!), and the squared stones are running on neutral points (P14!).
CG: This is strange. Black should not try to attack the white stones from this direction - this just harms the black moyo.  I would prefer to calmly live with S8 and either secure the top left or attack with J13.
CG: This move lacks fighting spirit. I would prefer L9!
CG: Why not the hane at K10?
CG: This looks like an overplay.
CG: Black should play O7.
CG: Too slow!
LL: white is behind and have to gain "sente"...  CG: I think B17 would be ok, too!
CG: Too slow!
CG: Aji-keshi! White is ahead now.
LL: white white sets a trap......  CG: I think white is already ahead.
LL: ... and lauches the attack !  CG: Finally! Both sides missed A2 for a long time.
winning tesuji !? (LL)
black group cannot connect !! (LL)
the black "triangle" group looks really dead... the game has turn good for white !!! (LL)
black seems to recognize that his group is dead, but he wants to continue the game... (LL)
no more "aji" : the game is over, and the rest has no interest ! (LL)
This is the right direction; however, a pincer is  also good for white, so perhaps you could consider A (C14) instead, to make a pincer less appealing.   This move is good though, and being afraid of a pincer is no reason to avoid approaching this corner.
Very good indeed.
Not a good peep; it strengthens white
Very slow.
Good defence.
Black is very thin everywhere. White has no weak groups and lots of good invasion points. Black's strategy has been inconsistent, as he has tried to develop his 3-3 points as though they were 4-4 stones.  The idea of 3-3 stones is that they require no follow-up, so black can ignore them and play a fast-paced game, taking control by pressuring white's weak groups. They are not good for developing on a large scale.
A perfect reducing move.
Painful
Not powerful enough from w.
You can take sente here
Very big. Now w is ahead.
A powerful-looking move, but it has to be followed up with a strong attack on white's two marked stones. Unfortunately, they are very hard to attack, so black is probably better playing for territory
Good, but w can connect underneath or live easily, so this is probably not enough.
White can always connect underneath at S12, so black has no use for his influence.
M18 is much bigger
Good cut.
A misread? See variation.
Allowing white to connect underneath loses a lot of points.
Ouch. This should have been black's sente.
T4 is much bigger
simply [13k?]: hi
This is rarely seen before but it possible
I think w overplay here
At this point w is in troube.  It is not possible to captu c14,c15
Fight is complicated
c13 is the best move
W H16 only help B stronge
bad aji for B
last 2 w move is bad
W good move
What is this white move for? C13 is the key point for both territory and influence
Bad
good attack black lost the chance to fight back
r14 is needed for black
This is interesting
It is possible to say white is leading D4 cannot make much terr and Q16 is dying
good move Q16 is dead
P3 is terrible Q9 or R9 would be better
if B is going to pay like this Q12 should be R12
not good
B is greedy for terr
over play
last 3 moves are not needed w just play c3 to take corner becuase lower right white group is settle And White win the game
Black mistake otherwise black is leading. centre is reducable in 2 direction and black has 4 corner
disastar for black no comment for the rest of the game
Hello,  my name is Adam Bencsik. I'm 14k on KGS, but i can't get over 24k on ORO, so i wrote that rank in the request. My opponents rank was 25k (the lowest rank on ORO), I don't know why i lost, and many times i was not really sure where to play.  J: Hi, im jason im 11k on KGS so im not sure how much help i could offer but i will try my best.
J: this is normal too
Where should i play after this?
I played this move, but...  J: if u don't play at R10 black would have played it and the situation could be worst, the current situation isn't too bad yet
...now black has two big corners, and white has almost no territory.
J: This move isn't critical yet go with C10 or F3 would be better for territory. Black S15 is more to hold his corner rather den attacking ur 2 pieces
I don't wanted to play a pincier because of the strong black stones in the corner.  J: maybe further
J: after this series of moves black have more mid influence which u kinda of need to stay in game.
backpacker [2k]: hi kgsk [1k]: hi
I tried to calculate how much to extend here.  A two space extension from one stone at P16 would be M16.  Then add an extra space for each stone in my thickness, would put me at G16, so I chose one less, and on the 4th line.   How would your thinking process be here?  Chris: The rule of thumb "wallheight plus one" stops taking effect with more than 3 stones. This rule was devised so that its easy to remember which shapes are uncuttable by invasion. With thickness like this, you should ask yourself, if White invades, will i feel comfortable attacking him?
Chris:  This is the first bad move. There are no cutting points in the wall, no need to protect this one. There are much bigger and more urgent things about. It is probably not even honte because of the great thickenss Black has built.
Chris: This exchange was good for black. With thickness you need to attack. This White group gives you the chance to. B39 is overplay though, as Whites group is alive, there is no need to play here.  The thinking process should be, White is strong, I need to lean on him to make the Black group strong as well, to be able to attack freely.
Chris: This sequence contradicts Blacks earlier strategy of building thickness. The marked stones have become so weak; Whites group feels no pressure anymore. Since Black got some cash though, it is not the end of the world.
I would say that this is small because he is playing close to his stones that are already alive.  Chris: I agree, as White I would have played A.
This seems to live, too easily.  Should I  be able to kill this stone?  Chris: No unfortunately not, since all stones were on the 4th line, it is unreasonable to expect this to die.
Chris: Again Black mechanically protects this useless cut. There is little to be gained. Tenuki to get another big point like A or B.
hard to believe that he can play so close to my thickness, but I do begin to feel pressured, and lose the thickness.  Chris: You seem to miss the point that White also has thickness. I was waiting for this move. It seems like Black neglects his own safety too much. When the marked stones were weak, the thickness worked well. After they got strong, the thickness lost most value. If you compare the strength of the White group to the Black wall, you must agree, that Black is only slightly stronger. The mistake was in not attacking the marked stones but rather take terretory on the right. Even though it was maybe not completely obvious back then, now it should be clear.
Chris: Playing A still better, once yoyu (should) know the group is dead.
Chris: Killing unconditionally is better... Did White have timepressure?
Chris: This is a very very bad move. Suprising to see a 1k take his own liberty in a semeai. This gives you Ko.
Chris: Trying so save a single stone is greedy. You included many liberty race variations which are pretty useless. Not because they are wrong, your tactical analysis was surely correct. But if you get yourself into a situation where you *have* to fight like crazy, then something *beforehand* something strategic went wrong. Maybe you should try to concentrate more playing superior not winning tactical encounters, that were unnecessary.
Chris: The following is a result from greediness, easily to be avoided (and probably be ahead!)
Chris: Black lost 20 points and sente (another 20 points for sente)
My chance to kill  Chris: This typical bad style KGS greedy overplay. You *should* have attacked earlier, when you could *gain from attacking*. In order to attack White so hard, you lose alot of cash, and as you discovered yourself later, could have ben killed. Again though, the problems arise earlier, as pointed out.
losing move
backpacker [2k]: thx kgsk [1k]: thx
Mark: A pretty standard joseki.  I don't know if another would be better given the two stone handicap. -------- Zam : Joseki says you could play at A, but this shape si solid, and prepares to attacking later on.
Mark: Again, I don't know if this joseki is appropriate (and I don't follow the joseki choice that's in the alternative from _38 Basic Joseki_). -------- Zam : I read this book twice, but I can't remeber much.  Don't focus on Josekis. This play is fine, as black does not know them too.
Zam : This move may only lead to a pincer.  Black takes the opportunity. Why not play on the other side, it is wider ... and gives more possibilities.
Mark: I've since learned this is not joseki (that a better choice is to move to the 3-3).  However, I'm concerned about giving B a chance to build walls in either direction.  Zam : I think it's just the pincer which is not usual.
Zam : This is the first slow move.  It does not give any way to attack the lonly stone @ A and allows top stones to fortify.  Black takes the chance. Black would not have played like that if you had played on the other side (see the other branch)  Any way, I would rather stabilize my group first playing at B
Zam : I don't like this move.  See the other branch
Zam : Good moves for black.  White is heavy, all black groups are secure, black has made some territories.  So far, black is leading.  White has to do something !  But what ? top left is secure top right is secure bottom is safe right is safe
Zam : those 2 white move seems territorial.  But white is behind black, so he had to do something more agressive !
Mark: Somewhat of a desperation move --- I appear to have yielded the corner too quickly and I want to somehow break up B's stones.  Zam : It is a useless move
Zam : White group is strong ... even if it does not have an eye yet.  He can make one easily on the bottom, and he is escaping to the center easily.  The top is till open, so why not play A or B maybe ?
Zam :  this does not kill Black, it can not connect to P14, it has no place to make eyes.  It is a very bad move
Mark: Throughout the game, I keep on thinking this B group is vunerable --- thus the surrounding moves.
Zam : This move is kind of slow but it makes some points, strenthen K16, so weakens your attack. I guess it is an honest move.  I would have played S3 or around C8 I guess
Zam : second white very slow move
Mark: I'm guessing a capping move would be better here.  Zam : The capping move is not really capping as black may connect. I would have blocked at A
Zam : Black should continue on playing the stone he just played
Mark: Okay, I've made B make a huge eyeless lump.  But as the next series of plays show, I don't know to take advantage of the fact I'm chasing B.  Zam : You have not read enough.  Black is safe since he can connect.  See variation
Zam : Ok for black, since he almost has an eye at B7
Zam : I feel this is too slow.  See variation
Zam : This black group is almos 100% safe !
Zam : Even if black makes some use of this move later on, this is not a good move.  White should tenuki
Mark: I think this move is a mistake.  My thought was to prevent B from running to the right and set up an invasion on the right, but I don't think this is the move to do it.  Zam : This stone is so lonely just in a middle of two strong groups.
Zam : white now has weak stones in the middle, and black gained an eye on the left and points on the right.
Mark: My mistake - I thought I had a ko.
Zam : not interesting for Black.
Zam : Don't do that unless you are sure you want to cut ... and it is not the right time to cut.
Zam : Thank you move
Zam : White is right about considering make his group a living group, but this move does not bring much points
Zam : You must defend on that move !
Zam : Black does not need that, of course !
Zam : This is not a good move
Zam : But black misses it !
Mark: And here Peter makes his winning move.  Zam : He was winning before that !
Mark: I resign here, thinking I don't have enough territory to balance out the upper left and lower left.  The continuation (which _might_ be reasonable) shows I might still take the upper right.
Zam : This is loosing KO threats, don't play that !
I havw not come across this response. Sensei's Library suggests a few responses. I did not really have a plan in responding to this move, and it shows.  CB> I think the best response in this case is E6 (or D7 but it is more complex) - since white has the upper left corner, it's important that you keep the outside to avoid white building a wall in front of D17
CB> the joseki dictionnaries qualifies your move as a mistake, but at your level it is not that much important
CB> white should not play like this, since he lets you reinforce yourself and G4 become lonely... see var
CB> you must continue on the outside! if you wanted to keep the corner, you could play here first before D6, but don't change your mind, playing once on the outside and then inside: it's important AT EACH MOVE to make plans and to try to follow them: "better a bad plan than no plan at all".
CB> this is too nice...
CB> now the black shape is not very good
CB> white can enclose black in the corner - plus, the fight is not over!
CB> white was wrong to tenuki, show him why!
CB> from now on, you should both come back to the fight on the lower left almost at each move, but I'm not gonna repeat it :-) CB> you should never leave fights unfinished when the outcome is so big
CB> not necessary: apart from D5, there is no reason to play in this area because:  - you are already alive in the corner  - your move does not really attack the two white stones, which can escape or make eyes by playing at Q2  Since it is not urgent nor threatening, you should play elsewhere because this area is very small!
CB> white finally fixed his weakness here... too bad you missed it.
Did I extend in the wrong direction here? Would something around the marked stone be better to keep my groups together?  CB> no, it is too slow - of course it would be better to connect them, but you must play in the big areas otherwise white will do so - think globally!
CB> good
CB> NEVER hane when there is a stone at R14!
CB> I think you must protect the cut right now (but if white cuts it's rather complex...)
CB> white is playing inside, that is not very good... you are building a large moyo on the right.
CB> I think it is ok...
CB> white could maybe take the sente to play elsewhere
CB> the cut doesn't work now that white answered... you should leave, it could work later CB> plus, you loose liberties, and the result of this sequence will be that white can connect his stones... sad...
CB> white should first play at Q12 to create weaknesses
CB> this is a yose move, and not the best - I would have ignored it as white
CB> now it is terrible because white is connected and doesn't have to search for eyes for his center stones!!!!
CB>no - don't play high if you want to build a base
CB> dangerous...
CB> this is a bad shape (called the 'elephant's eye') - oh, by the way, your top group is not yet secure
CB> I would first try to escape or connect
CB> white could be more severe
CB> that is big, but gote - only play such moves when you don't find something else to do. For instance, I would first try to exploit white's weaknesses, like finding a move which both awakes the shicho at A and the stone at B
Now this, and all that follow it, are the reason I'm submitting this.  CB> I hope you already found some interesting things in the commentary! ;-)   I'm unfamiliar with this kind of attack. At first it seemed doomed, but you can clearly see that it wasn't.  What is White's aim here? Capture, reduction, invasion? Given white's aim, what kind of responses should black make?  CB> white is just jealous of your territory here - there are two approaches:  - give up the two stones  - save the two stones and try to kill white  Since you did not make many points on the upper side, you are probably already behind, so I would opt for the second choice.
CB> it's not easy for white... I've got the feeling you should be able to kill him
CB> try to enclose white - and, a quite general remark: quite often, with invasions, it is good to avoid contact moves. Plus, since your wall is strong, you can play further.
CB> no: try first to enclose white - he may not be able to do eyes inside, and even if he manages to do so he will make only two points gote, and you will be strong on the outside  CB> but I think you can still kill white
CB> that's why Q9 was better than Q10...
Here you can see I'm focused too much on making sure W cannot live, and so I let him get out.  CB> This move is not necessary!
Misclick.
CB> ouch...
And this should have been at J4. By now the game is over.  CB> I'll stop here... good bye.
Youngmin [9k?]: ty Bluebottle [10k]: thanks for the game  So in general, the game was relatively even before the invasion on the right, when I lost everything.  CB> you both missed big opportunities... and there are some basic principles of play you didn't apply:  - make plans, don't change your mind  - play urgent and threatening moves before playing gote moves even if they are big  - play in big areas first  - don't play yose moves in the middle game  - don't try to cut when it doesn't work, you'll loose liberties and later opportunities  - play solid moves when you want to build a base  - when invading, try to escape first before trying to live inside  - when invaded, first try to enclose the opponent  - and play good shapes !  Thanks again for your review.
Usually it is not normal too approach this corner. 4,4 points are not as urgent as empty corners or other corner moves. I would expect move 4 to be in one of the marked areas.
I like the idea here but I would make the pincer one longer at A. See var
J17 slightly off now. Not really bad its just neither one thing nor the other. Not a severe pincer so F17 is almost dead and not a proper extension.
This move is a nice move to get if he answers but its probably not quite big enough yet. A or B are probably bigger. Also, this makes J17 seem even closer to the wall.
Move 21 has some problems finding the best move.  Black A or D will force white B. Black C will force white A or B. Black B will force white D.  I wanted to keep pressure on white as well as develop influence in the centre.  This is a nice idea by white. If he approached at Q17 it would be easy for you to find the best move so this shows good awareness of whole board.  If I am playing here I think the only choice is C. Its a hell of a lot of points and you are bound to develop a large right side next. See vars.  Also, I tihnk your D and A actually force white C. Look how many stones you have here. For white to get a whole corner that quikly cannot be too bad for him. Its points in your area of the board and it can't be netted in cleanly.  Maybe B is playable as well. I think you are probably correct when you say B forces D as if we go B,C then O17 will be severe. So, the likely order is B,D,C which seems nice for black.
There is a proverb. Don't contact weak stones. I think it applies here. This move tries to do too much. The moyo is not impressive enough for a move like this yet.
w settles quite easily. w should be happy here i think. There are weaknesses at A. C is still available and big and B (or even D) can reduce the moyo well.
Seening the came now N17 is better.  I was afraid of Q15 by which white could break out. Now think B Q16, W P16,  B P15, W Q15, white R16 will stop white.  Or another, better idea for black ?  I agree this move is a bit odd. It seems to just be trying to patch up earlier mistakes. I am not sure if N17 is better. See var.  If you want to patch this up and get sente. I think the only move is to peep Q16. But it is painful to make the white stones this strong. See var
This is big but I don't think its a good move. Leaving the hane at S17 is a mistake to me. The corner is so big!
Big but maybe not urgent. I would S17.  Also I am not sure it is even the biggest tenuki. All the marked moves seems more interesting to me. But i think C is necessary. Notice it not only takes the corner but undermines the right side as well. It is huge!
It seems like you are following your opponent too much. S17 is still the biggest I think. See vars for other alternatives.
I think this is wrong direction. W should pincer. See var
Nice. I like this move. Use whites weakness to make your own group stronger. Its good.
I am not sure about this move. I would prefer to hane. See var.
Again questionable move, better at K3 ?  I think this is fine. K3 probably ok as well. Seems like a matter of perference to me, not a major issue
This defence is a bit passive. Better at P7 I think.
I am having a problem now, need to defend an invasion at R8, but what is the bst move to do so ?? 29 looks a bit awkward.  Yes this does look awkward. I think it is maybe just asking for too much. This maybe gains you a couple more "points" that R8 but leave many more weaknesses. Not worth it.  See vars
White does get a lot of points in the corner now and opens up the right side.  See previous vars for ways to avoid this.
thought defending at S6 was too passive. but are there better moves as an alternative ?  S6 would be much too passive. Impossible to play it.  Still S17 is the best move to me :-)  Other than that this seems good.
This is a nice move. It is hard to deal with. Maybe H2 can be better at H4 see vars.
Is J2 better since this links the 2 groups together ? I preferred to have a living group get out with sente. L2 is goto for white so I thought at a later stage I might have a change to play L2 myself first.
So this is bad and lets L2 be a 50-50 move for each player. see var
Good =)
My oppent thought this was the loosing move, first M17 since this is a move white can hardly ignore.  I was afraid of B M17, white D12 etc. Counted white to have app. 75 points. Thought black would not be able to get enough points in the centre. Also the question was who plays L2 first will have a shift of app 20 points.  I agree that M17 is a must. This is why S17 is so huge. I wouldn' call it a losing move but it certainly loses something.
Again, better at M17 ?  yes
Settling like this in sente is huge for w. Double sente as this was is always the biggest thing on the board.
Another questionalbe move. Better K11 to seal off the  centre ??  I think so. Of course you need to count first and make sure you have enough. But K11 does seem like the right move
Again a questionable move since this gives white to link up. I was afraid white could break trough, but is this really possible ?? Better K15 (with later the change to play J18 with sente, and black can still keep some pressure on the wite centre group) and start the fight ?  Yes must always block. Letting w run through is a disaster.
I am now loosing the control over the game.  L14 was a scared move. It is indeed getting hard now. This group went from totally secure to not so and this makes the game hard. Now things like A and B which you would have called miai to reduce the left side are questionable as B may become sente.
I think there is a bit of a tesuji here. See var
Now there really is a tesuji ;-)
Aigan, not good, better F6 to link and have C9 still there as an endgame move.  I actually like your sequence here. I think it is a loss for white when you make life although there is one move I would change see var
This ko just isn't quite playable at the moment. There are not enough threats. Maybe you have to just try and make eyes instead...
Black looses about 30 points on thhe left.  This is about the end of the game. The loss is too big. The ko was a flower ko for white
had an idefix that I could pull the 3 stone out.
Better B3 ?  I think this is ok too, they are similar.
So its a good game. Getting S17 put you ahead but not following with M17 gave w a chance again.  The move at L14 puts w ahead as the strength of groups changed and this is a HUGE problem.  The life on the left side was very good and brought the game back to you but the ko was just not quite possible, after that w has enough I think.  Hope this helps to somewhat... if you have any more questions i am aitkensam on KGS. YOu can call me there.  Happy New Year.  Sam
Donal: White 6 seems to be a bit low or overconcentrated on the right considering how high Black's position is. It's hard to know the best move, but I would consider for example A, B, or C, all of which are a little more balanced.
8 is a good move.
Black 9 is in the worng direction. It would be a great move if there was already a black stone at A, but if White plays there first, Black's stone will be useless. So instead, play B, A, or C.
Before playing 10, White should perhaps exchange White A, Black B first, and then 10. But this is still a success for White.
Black 11 is solid, but there's no time to play like this right now. He should play Black A, White B, Black C.
This was no joseki, but seems balanced to us.  Donal: Locally it's reasonable, but there's no extension from Black's wall, so since it's White's turn, this is no good for Black.
With White 16, Black's wall is neutralized. Black's strategy has failed.
Black tries to make something with his wall, but this extension is too narrow. He should just play somewhere else, like A, B, or C.
White is being too greedy. He doesn't want Black to get anything from his wall, but that is unreasonable. He has to choose A or B. Black should now push through at B, and when White blocks he can play at A with sente. Black can then play C, and can later play at D.
thoughts on this move? should w have addressed lower left  Donal: Of course White 20 is big. But playing at the lower right seems urgent. Next Black can attach at A, and if B, then cut at C.
Normally instead of 31, Black would want to play at A. If this stone can't live, it means Black's cut at 25 was no good because it gave White too much corner territory.
White 34 is too easy-going. Even without all the extra stones he has, it's better to play at A instead. In this case he should be trying to kill Black in the corner, and also attack him on the right side.
White was probably thinking of a handicap-game joseki he has seen when he played at 34. This is rarely played in even games because it is favorable for Black.
Before 36, White should probably play A with sente.
Black shouldn't run away as it just gets him into trouble. Actually Black needs to worry about White playing at A, which attacks his group on the lower left. Playing there himself would be prudent. Even blocking at B is probably an overplay.
Black is just making it worse and worse. There is nothing to be achieved here.
Black's last few moves haven't accomplished anything. White's capture at 44 is a big success for him.
Black 45 is a nice move, but he is still vulnerable to White A, especially now that White has become thick on the lower side. If Black thinks that defending at A is too slow, he should at least play at B, which supports Black's weakness on the left and treats black 5 lightly.
any better moves for w instead of this?  Donal: White A is best. This defends the corner and attacks Black. If black B, then white C chases Black. Black can escape to his stones below, but just connecting has no value for him. Meanwhile White is erasing Black's influence in the center. White G becomes a deadly attack on the Black group. This is all made possible by White's thick capture of three stones.
Black 47 should just be at A. Then he can invade the corner later. 47 was not sente, as Black had to come back to 49 anyway. The exchange of 46 for A is a big loss for White.
perhaps j17 is better  Donal: This move is just fine, but B is better as explained previously.
Black's invasion seems OK when just looking at the local position. But Black needs to realize that he has a very weak group on the lower left, and that his group on the  upper right is a little precarious also. He needs to address these problems somehow.  A is the obvious choice. He could also consider B or C. In view of the overall position, Black 51 is an overplay.
Here, White should not be trying to stop Black from connecting to the left, since he can't do it anyway. He should try to make thickness in the center and put it to work somehow (see diagram.)
White 60 is in the wrong direction. There is no urgent need to stop Black from connecting to the left. The center is more important. After Black's strong play at 59, White is unable to save his stone at 56.
Black 65 can be cut off. So he should play A instead. (See diagram.)
could W have done better than ko here, or did B miss a clean connection?  Donal: White doesn't need to play ko with 70. Instead he can play White A and capture Black, but Black becomes thick on the outside (see diagram.)  White doesn't really have good ko threats. When you consider that it only became ko when Black made a mistake, you can see that White should never have tried escaping at 60.
better ko threats for B? possibly B3. seems like W has to ignore almost anything and take the ko here  Donal: This ko threat is plenty big. Black should be glad that White ignored it, because White still has threats like B. If White was going to end up like this, he shouldn't have played the ko at all.
White 90 is awfully thin, but White probably feels he has to take chances like this to win now. Actually, White has a move to live in the upper right corner (see diagram.) Of course, the question is when he should do that.
should B have protected territory, p10 maybe?  91 seems like such a good point that it would be a shame to let White play there. And White 90 seems like an overplay, so it's better to respond more positively.
Cutting at 95 leads to a poor result for Black. See the diagram for a better way.
Having cut, Black must follow up by extending at A. Letting White atari is terrible. Since he can't capture White's group, coming out at 99 doesn't help. If white B, black C, Black is just playing profitless neutral points.
Since White ignored black 99, Black should try to get sente and follow up with an attack at A. So instead of Black 105, which is solid but gote, he should play at B, and if white C, then black D.
With white 106, the black group is completely adrift. Black runs away with 107, but this is a very thin shape. Extending at A invites an attack at B though. For a bold counterattack, see the diagram.
White 110 missed a great chance to play at A.
ear reddening?  Donal: White 112 is a nice move. Because Black insisted on saving his stones on the left, he lost his chance to attack White on the right. His attemps to attack now don't do very much. Black should now play just play black A, white B, black C, white D, black E to connect.  A theme much repeated in this game: miss your chance to play the vital point, and after your opponent plays there, try to get the same result you would have gotten even though it is too late. It's better to change course.
secures connection while threatening c11, but W think q11 cut is bigger  Donal: Black has to play here or risk being killed. (See diagram.) Or he can give up two stones, but it gets complicated (see diagram.)  Summing up this game, Black 9, making a wall but then allowing White to erase it with 16 was the biggest problem. The other thing that stands out is that both players are playing difficult moves where the consequences are unpredictable. It's far better to play simpler moves where you know exactly how it will turn out, even if it doesn't seem as powerful or exciting.  Try to understand the "worst case" in each situation, and know what you are guranteed to get regardless of what your opponent does. If your move gives some wonderful result if your opponent plays in a particular way, you are probably only imagining that he will play there. I think that both players are constantly getting results that don't live up to the expectations they had a few moves earlier.  The best way to learn from this is to back over your game records, and see which of your moves actually worked, and which ones failed. Maybe the failed ones were more complicated than it was worth?  (End of Donal's comments)
good timing for W next couple moves?
this was a mistake as W had some stronger endgame moves to follow B about 10 pts behind we think so needed perfect yose to catch up
bad move .. a few desparation plays follow, then a resign
B resigns
Was this move joseki?  F: I don't know about joseki, but I don't feel you come off better after the exchange.  If you push into the corner at D2 or even C2 if it works then that territory becomes yours rather than his - if he tries to pincer you then really all he'll be doing is creating a weak group of his own.
F:  W wants to play at D2 anyway for good shape - if you care strongly about this small area of the board then you're going to have to protect at F2 anyway - why not take a shortcut and go straight there?  Then it will be he who has to respond to your moves - you gain sente.
F:  Interesting way of looking at sequences:  If you had played F2 first and W had responded with D2, would you have played E2?  If not, your moves are inefficient.
How should I have best responded to white's counter-pincer here?  F: Don't be afraid of sacrificing - if W is determined to capture your lone B stone, then you can use this against him.  If you can build a wall facing below in the following sequence whilst W captures your lone stone, then you've created a giant moyo which W will have to try to invade.
Jumping out, while pressuring white's group here.  F: Always looks like W can escape with P14, which is going towards your potential territory.  Keep him outta there!
Trying to increase the pressure on white's group here, but it seems I may not be able to prevent the escape if white presses it enough. Perhaps it may have been better to try to escape from white's counter pincer.  F: Probably best to lightly skip away - contact moves like this have a few general consequences: - making the opponent stronger elsewhere (towards your Q14 stone in this instance) - making you stronger in the opposite direction (towards L17) The latter is what forms the fundamental of a 'leaning attack' - lean on some stones in order to strengthen your position to attack in the opposite direction.  Unfortunately here you are also weakening your Q14 stones by leaning.
F: Although the aim of your next moves are wise, W creates a large moyo here which you should be looking to invade directly on the side - the rest of the game pretty much helps W strengthen his position here.
F: This doesn't look right - too kind to W's lone stone, too close to your stones to be a respectable extension... Perhaps a more direct approach like J17 or K16, or even another leaning move like L16 would be more appropriate.  Your running group has a fair amount of escape routes still.
This isn't exactly an ideal position for influencing toward the center, but it seems ok. What do you think?  F: Well you've been pushing against a pretty strong group of stones so they've been happy to push back quite hard.  W has a weak group on the board - if you want to push something around then you'll find it doesn't resist very much (because if it did it would risk death!).  If you're worried about your centre B group having enough room to make two eyes then you can use the weak group to help you.  It can also help you build territory on the side.  Don't concentrate on killing it - just make sure your groups are happy and it will be subservient to them - if it is not then by all means punish it, but really you want the opponent to continue trying to save it so you can profit.  See variation.
This seems the last chance to reduce white's territory here.  F: Good.
Necessary?  F: No, better to take sente (see variation from previous move)
F: W makes a base for his weak group and hugely improves his situation.
Here I was trying to threaten to split white's groups.  F: I like it
F: Don't back out so easy!  J17 stone isn't a big price to pay even if an attack doesn't work out
F: This feels slow - I'd play one of the marked points
My response to white's cap here seems very passive. Better ideas?  F: Indeed!  Threaten to isolate it - it's not going to get through into your lower territory, what is it really going to do, other than run for safety?
Trying to reduce white's large side position. Perhaps this was played too close to where white is strong though.
F: Again, don't be afraid to sacrifice - do you really want any white stones facing your open group above? I'd hane at E11 and go from there.
F: Doesn't look good - but the knights jump has weaknesses, as does the two space jump above your stones, so before trying to make space for eyes you could try breaking through instead. This will have the side-effect of making your position more solid.
Escape seems unlikely, so I'm trying to take some eye space.  F: Better at D7 or C7 I think, if this is your immediate aim.
Threatening to cut white's groups, but perhaps this was a bad play as it ended up in gote.  F: Yeah, don't play if you lose sente... sente is crucial for situations like these.  Making a strong bamboo joint by playing at J9 could open up some opportunities - the left side of your stones is only one eye at the moment.  Looks like the crucial point is E8.
If I'd gotten here first, the eye space would at least have been a little bigger.
F: I like the more aggressive nature, but this move in itself is bad - takes away one of your liberties and W has no choice but to strengthen his own stones - instead try cutting the knights jump...
F: Last chance to cut gone; may have already been too late.  Only possibility of escape I see now involves some clever running to bottom left, but even that looks unlikely... let's play it out
Ubemaya [15k]: gg dbstraight [16k]: thanks for the game  After launching every counter attack I could find to try, my group still dies, so I resigned. I almost wonder now if I should've tried so hard to save it in the first place. CGoban's score estimator puts me only 15.5 points behind here even with the death of my group. In any event, it was a huge loss. Most of all I want to know if I could've saved it and how. Aside from that, how is my opening in general? What else could I have played to reduce white's territory that wouldn't have led to such a messy fight?   F: You could definitely have saved the group - try to be more threatening with your moves; threaten to connect, threaten to capture, and then the eyespace should form much easier.  Remember to pressurise the opponent's weak groups - the P15 stones had a really easy time of it compared to your weak group, it seems this could've simply been because there wasn't much attention paid to them - if he had been valiantly trying to defend them, then maybe they would've attracted your attention and maybe been killed.  Killing the weak groups shouldn't be your aim, but to gain from attacking them, and then punishing them for not being adequately defensive.  Even at this point in the game, a move at O13, P11 or O11 could stop his groups from connecting and put them in trouble.  Every move here could be used as a KO threat, so if he doesn't respond, you could kill... thus trading your E8 group for his P15 group.  Score estimator thinks his group is dead anyway, hence why the score is fairly close.  Gain a few points around F16 and you could be back in it...  Regarding the opening, it looks okay, but it's almost like you forget about the top right + right hand side completely once you've secured some space for your N14 group.  W has a weak group sitting there for a long time unpressured, when adding pressure to it should be where the flow of the game takes you (the by-product of his counter-pincer).  There's also a big area around R7 left undeveloped for a long time, eventually W takes this area and instead of it meaning he has two weak groups, he manages to just about link up with his other weak group forming (just about) one big safe group - disaster!  Maybe if you treated your stones a bit lighter, kept your options open, sacrificed where it'd help your main objective, and pressured your opponents weak groups, you'd find yourself winning more.  Good luck!
Ricard: Hi,have a good game.
Tom: Hi
In the game you played D10.  I'm sure you played this move without thinking. This is the sort of move that makes you lose games without really understanding why you lose.  The corners are much bigger than the sides.  Which corner is bigger? This is the question you MUST ask yourself while you are playing (if you ask yourself this question, you will have better results in your games than if you don't).  C is small because it makes you overconcentrated (all your stones on the left side).  The difference between A and B is more subtle and probably beyond my ability to explain. So I can only say what I prefer.  In this situation, I would prefer to play at the top right corner. Black's stones are on the 3rd line (even on the 2nd line). This means that he will have a hard time building a moyo.  If he has a hard time building a moyo, then I don't need to come in at B right away.  The squares are other moves you can consider. It is really beyond my ability to determine which is best. I suggest you explore them to get a feeling for how they influence the game.
This shape is very bad.  It has weaknesses that black can exploit to take huge profit on the top and right side of the board.
This move is too small.  The corners are still biggest part of the board right now.  Just ignore black, if he wants to play down here, let him and take bigger points.
Good.
I should have extended to B before going to A  ---  Definitely!  Force Black into a low position (on the third line).  Playing at A was your third global mistake (D10 and the weak shape in the top left are the other two).
This painful for you and gives too much profit to Black.
I dislike this shape.  ---  Look at Black. All his stones are strong. Your stones all have a lingering weakness.  When your looking for moves, always ask yourself if they will leave a weakness.
It's painful to have to respond like this.
The marked intersections may seem like end game moves, but I believe they are the biggest moves of the game at this point.  Probably worth 15-20 points each.
If black plays where you played, he will only get about 6 points more.  The corner moves are bigger.
This move doesn't do anything.  you need to play at the border of 2 moyos.
This is the second time you try to close a moyo from the wrong direction.  You need to play at the border of the 2 moyos.
This is the second time Black enters your moyo.  This destroys the purpose of your move.
The rest of the game is just closing off territory. I will stop the review here.
BigHomie [13k]: hello. ggg
[J] This makes the marked point big.
[J] Likewise.
[J] Black shouldn't really be all low along the bottom like this. Creates some obvious points for invasion later (or maybe even now)
BigHomie [13k]: I got greedy here. I think I was supposed to play at C3 if in this corner at all.
[J] I prefer C11 for a black invasion here, makes A and B miai.
BigHomie [13k]: I liked this move even though it didn't kill the stone, it made him small and I expanded on the left  [J] Yes, this is a big point for you.
[J] Black should not contact here.
BigHomie [13k]: Was there a way to prevent B from getting out?  [J] Not really, and this sequence is not good for you. see comment at move 21.
[J] Black has now (thanks to white) a nice wall pointing at what should have been a good white moyo.
BigHomie [13k]: how about F12 instead? It does leave some holes though.
[J] R9 would be huge for B at the moment, and make it very hard for you to invade the right hand side.
BigHomie [13k]: This attack seems kinda late, looking back. I might have gotten more territory at R9 as well.  [J] Just in time, though blacks play at N15 helps in this regard.
[J] Playing here is inviting B to close you in, allowing B at least the chance at a huge area in the top half of the right hand side. See var.
BigHomie [13k]: I don't know the joseki here, if there is one.
BigHomie [13k]: this move let me put pressure on him later. I think that Q6 would've been safer.  [J] Your position this way is very low, B should be happy.
[J] A wall essentially lacking defects. Q5 was a "thank you" move, which you should avoid.
[J] not good, give your group solid life instead.
[J] If you ever want to attack the R12 stone (and you might) do not contact it like this, you only make it stronger.
BigHomie [13k]: This was a really complicated fight.
BigHomie [13k]: P14 would've been better, I think.
[J] Ouch, this just allows black to make a small ko into a big ko, expensive!
BigHomie [13k]: I guess I should have answered this attack. He did end up getting this corner in the end.  [J] Now you pay the price for the ko, here or somewhere else. Too late at this point to avoid loss.
BigHomie [13k]: It was a good ko threat, but I would've lost my whole right side if I had responded.
[J] Should be a won game for black at this point, the ko fight, and loss of this whole corner for white, has really turned the game.
BigHomie [13k]: This was a weird move. I was wondering what to play here. I think that G16 might have been smarter.  [J] Not many good choices for white at the moment, just have to see what comes your way.
[J] Hang back a little.
BigHomie [13k]: Now I have cuts all over the place.
BigHomie [13k]: If I had played it back a bit, I might have been able to prevent him getting out.  [J] Yes, but much earlier, as noted.
BigHomie [13k]: E11 instead.
BigHomie [13k]: I was fighting too hard to keep him out of the middle.
BigHomie [13k]: Lame move. Maybe G12 instead.
BigHomie [13k]: I think this move saved me the game. If he had gotten to this area first, I'd have lost.  [J] you were lucky to win from here, a testament to your perserverance and good luck.
BigHomie [13k]: This jump left a bunch of holes. It pressured him, but I could've found a better move.  [J] This move is OK - better than OK - actually this play won you the game, because it cut off the marked stone and turned a large area into white territory. The fact that you lost a big part of it, then got it back, is part of the fun of go.
BigHomie [13k]: Maybe P15 would have been better.  [J] No, P15 doesn't work.
[J] An excellent result for white.
[J] Good, the aim now must be to keep the black stones from living.
BigHomie [13k]: I don't like this move, but I don't know where I should have played instead.  [J] I agree, not a good move. Opens too many weaknesses in your position.
BigHomie [13k]: Was this move necessary?  [J] Something was definitely required, at very least you should be looking to connect your G17 stones out while retaining the chance to kill black if it arises.
BigHomie [13k]: This move by B seems small.
BigHomie [13k]: Then again, B now has 2 eyes.  [J] Yes, B should have died.
BigHomie [13k]: This was a wasted move.  [J] You could not have later cut at G4 without this move, so not entirely wasted.
BigHomie [13k]: G2 is bigger, I think.
[J] You have actually come out quite well in this corner.
[J] Doesn't work with all the black stones nearby.
BigHomie [13k]: A bad attempt to try to save this group. It just doesn't have enough room.
BigHomie [13k]: Why did B play this move now?  [J] Indeed???
BigHomie [13k]: Should have been B6
[J] See var.
BigHomie [13k]: Should have been A5
BigHomie [13k]: This was actually a silly attempt to trick B into making the mistake that he actually made later when he lost this group.
BigHomie [13k]: Could I have taken this corner group? I don't think so at this stage of the game.  [J] No, it was safe for black.
BigHomie [13k]: This move was smart. It sets up B to take my three stone group. I should have realized it at this stage.
BigHomie [13k]: L7!
BigHomie [13k]: Why did B play this move? I don't think I could cut here.  [J] I agree.
BigHomie [13k]: This move is why I won by 20.5 instead of about 3.5  [J] Lucky lucky lucky.
k0n1g [14k]: oops BigHomie [13k]: sorry...
BigHomie [13k]: Wasted move.
BigHomie [13k]: A10 would have finished this "dead" group.
BigHomie [13k]: This was a half-hearted ko threat because I thought the group was already dead.
BigHomie [13k]: I chose to ignore D1 because I realized that I could still make my group on the top left live if I won the ko fight.
BigHomie [13k]: Why didn't he take E2? That's why he played the threat.
BigHomie [13k]: This was a smart play, but I valued this group more than he appeared to.
BigHomie [13k]: Not bad, but why not go into my gaping bottom left corner? BigHomie [13k]: I didn't even have two eyes there!  [J] Utterly pointless, not a ko threat in any way shape or form.
BigHomie [13k]: Again, I think he should have taken the bottom left. I practically gave him a free pass.
I think R13 is too big for black (even in this situation).   Am I right?  Yes, this is a nice move for B. he is attacking and extending at the same time.
That move is good.. but the timing was wrong. B should play at Q4 group first.
Best solution for b here?  Maybe P5 or R3....  P5 for sure... with R3 B is surrounded by W. And that is always a bad situation.
There's an empty triangel at the lower right side! What is the possibility for whit to steal points there?  Depends, if B want to just exchange points he can play A.  If he want's battle go for B
Are three better invasion points for white than D8??  D8 was overplay. E6 would attack and create territory more efficient
Black forgot B4  B4 isn't a urgent move. Play at B is nice because the territory at D10 and D14.
PierreAFeu [6k]: :o)
W can't get anything at A. and B is a overplay.  Should just keep playing like O17 move
Very bad for black...
Where should play white at next???  At P6.
Is there a better invation point for white than N16?
Is there a better Invation Point than G12?? (in order to reduce the terretorry of black on the left)
Not so good for white at the upper-right.
Big mistake from black!
The development of the white stones in the middle is very bad?  Any suggestions to do this better???  Just keep everthing connected and B will have no problem... the better plays i told before =)
I don't like this white s15 so much because two reasons:  1) r17 cut is still not possible since black s17 captures the stone. 2) black is aiming at a peep or cut around 15, so although white is trying to build thickness here, it's not so effective.
Truly, I played the avalanche to gain influence. I have played with this opponent a few times, each time he/she tried to prematurely deny any existence of my territory to form in any way, while leaving him/herself open.  Right here maybe I should consider extending and N-16, but I'm not sure. Would appreciate help in handling this situation, thank you :)  Maybe the whole game is crafted out of the right hand upper corner and the variations of the joseki chosen.
wanted to push the weak stone group towards the influence, but I don't know which what is the best way to handle my weak point at Q-15. Maybe I should extend at N-16?  As an opponent, my opponent always plays seemingly overpowered moves like this, I cannot grasp the correct chance to punish him/her.   ---------------------------  Maybe due to this black extension, white should have played r7 at r11 instead ?  Then if black extends to r6, white blacks at r5, at which point white has made corner profit and strenghthened above.  I show this in a variation.
Seems a bad choice :(  ----------------------  maybe white can protect the cut in more useful ways than q14?  ideas to think about:  1) n17 hane.  Does this white move make the r17 cut severe ?  if black then answers the cut with s17 atari, when white extends to r18 he's threatening two things, both the turn at s28 and the turn at q18.  2) what about hitting on top at q13 ?  not sure but worth thinking about.    3) an immediate invasion at r11.  You better ask someone stronger than me about this !  (i'm 1k on kgs)
p12 doesn't seem good because it provokeds q11 which is what black wants anyway.  now that q14 has made the white stones strong, plus white already played r7, i would think about either invasion at r11 , or perhaps even cutting at n17.  Does that cut make the r17 cut a possibility ?  reading needed here !
once black is settled on right, i don't think o10 needed.  How about taking a big point somewhere else ?
It looks like black made a comfortable position both on top and below white's position, so it would be good to see how white could do better here.  The first thing I notice are weaknesses in black's position at n17 and r17, so white should be thinking about how to exploit those weakness (which exploitation may have to happen several moves earlier !)  I'll now go back several moves and look at what white may have done differently that could be better...
seems too conservative.  i would be looking for opportunities to take big moves elsewhere.
Wasn't as bad as expected, but pretty bad.
If board were more open, then this white m3 seems good.  However, with strong black wall above, this move could make white too busy.  For example, if black runs away with n4 or presses with m4, then when smoke clears, white will have to both fix the m3 stone plus worry about black invading corner with r3.  For this reason, I think in response to black o3, i would consider white either playing patiently at q3 to protect corner territory in aticipation of black making a base with L3, after which white could go on to next big move, or I'd consider white answer o3 at j3 which allows a base to be made at either f3 or m3.
would r3 invasion have made the white corner destablized ?  If so, it might be better than this slide, since the slide may give white sente to make the h3 extension on the bottom.
this small extension seems less valuable than some other possibilities to think about, each of which takes some reading to verify whether it works or not.  1) if white j18 hane, black k18 block, white h18 connect, is it sente ?  In other words, if black does nothing in this are next, can white successfully invade at L17 or clamp at L18 ?    Also, if white plays R17 cut and black ataris at S17 and white cuts at N17, can white make a gain ?  Worth studying...  2) What about white C4 or C7  ?  or even a probe at C3, although I must admit I don't understand such things.  If black answer F3 at C4, white might have lost opportunities here.  A good book on the subject of invading is "Get Strong at Invading", I've been reading it now actually.
this black N14 might not be so good since later a white peep at M15 might activate a white invasion on the top.
I'm not sure of the timing but white should be thinking about how to use the cuts at N17 and R17 for some gains.  Maybe to prepare for that, white should play O14 instead of K11.
Since white already answered N2 at M2, white may be able to ignore M6 and take a big move elsewhere.  I'm still wondering about C4 or C7...
too bad for white.  This move makes the invasion on left side much more difficult.  I don't think J5 was necessary
maybe this is too far from h16.    Maybe d11 or g12 instead ?
Not sure of what I should play now.
what about d9 instead of g11 ?    Another point to consider is d2.
[end of review comments]
Since black is connected out, white's e12 and g11 aren't doing much so black's invasion seems to be worth more than white's small capture at k18.
Mike [14k]: gg
B: Playing at D6 here is also ok, because of the presence of the other star point. Don't do it for every approach, because then you will have all your stones on the fourth line, and high-low balance is important. But here, I'd say D6 is better.
I played this because I was worried about his right side becoming strong.  B: Yes, you are right that jumping in here is good, but there are better spots. See some of the variations.
B: This point is perhaps too small. The top-right group is secure on its own. The left side is bigger, and now would be a good time to make the right safe.  Any of the triangled moves are very big in and of themselves.  The square move makes life for the right, and has follow up moves in the bottom right. If you had that point, a move at P4 is much better.  The message here is: if you have sente (early on), look for a move which protects and attacks. If nothing needs protecting, take the biggest point.
B:Here you could have played F16, but I prefer the joseki in the variation.
B: This move is not great. As I mentioned in move 14, if you have the initiative, take the biggest move, especially if it protects something.  The right side has become the biggest, the left is very small. Even if he took the left with, say, C8, you still have the corner. So C9 does not protect. Again, R7 is bigger.
B: I can't say I like this move. It doesn't do much. You can't make anything on the right, because of O14 and gang, and the left is iffy too without a follow up move at E14.  If you are worried about losing inroads in the centre, there are better ways. Again, at R7. Alternatively, coming from the bottome left would be good. If you are feeling brave, you could try disrupting white's bottom with a move like H3 or H4. Or simply playing F4 of F5 gives you an in to the middle, and gives you follow up moves to attack the bottom even better.  If it's the top you're worried about, I think N15 would be best. It secures heaps on the righter side of the top. K13 leaves the top exposed.
Looking back I dont think invading was correct, but where should I play?  B: You could have got away with this. There's no reason it had to die. It's just that the next stuff didn't quite pan out. A more secure connection, such as O7 for move 30 would have helped.  You could have played at P4. I think this would have been a much better play. This would have disrupted W just as well, but would have been closer to friends. P4 is the standard approach to the 3-4 point (and P3, but that's no good here).  Generally, 3rd line is for a base. If you hope to run, try 4th line, unless what you are running to is close.  The big problem with this move is that while W attacks it, he simultaneously builds territory up the side, AND this terrority attacks the Q10 stone. It forces him to do awesome stuff. Also, you have to consider exactly where you are running to. The Q10 stone is not alive. And everything is very far away. And living inside is extremely difficult.  Again, I'd say R7. Get a base, get lots of points. If he takes the bottom, well that's fine. You can't have everything. If he doesn't get the bottom, then you can attack it and get a big profit.
B: Probably better O7 here.
I didnt know where to play here... thought I should try to head towards the center.  B: Nothing wrong with this, although W should perhaps have followed up with F5. Alternatively you could try L6, M6 or something like that, since those stones are weakly connected. A move like that makes cutting difficult and expands you influence in the centre.
B: As white gets stronger in this line, the cut at P6/O7 becomes better and better. The knight's jump (marked) is not automatically connected. Usually it's fine because white gets two weak groups in doing so, but one is attached to the corner, and the other can run to the newly-made strength.  If something is connected to safety by a weak connection, keep considering it, even if your opponent seems to ignore it. They may just be waiting until it is easier.
B: This is futile. You can't kill this, not with the srength on the K line. If you want to run up, N7 (though I don't think that works here). Otherwise, try to make life, or let it die.
B: The group is dead now.
B: Maybe you could try F15 here. Otherwise you are wasting the K14 stone.
I think this was a mistake looking back. Closer to M13 would have been better?  B: It's about even. N14 guarantees territory up top, M13 gets you some down the middle. M13 may be a little better.
B: Not necessary. He can't get in (see variations). It does get you a point to block here, but a point is not enough, when there are far bigger moves.
B: I'm not going to go into the endgame, much, suffice it to say you made a few moves that were not the most points possible e.g. S18, S19 after that, S11, C2. Endgame is a very mathematical thing, and really needs either a teacher or a good book.
Is there any way to protect this territory? Should I even try?  B: Yes, you should try. The way you went just wasn't read out enough.
B: If you try to capture an invader like this, be sure it will work. You stand to lose more than you gain if you are wrong.
W creeps right in =(
Too calm? how many points is a cut there worth?  B: A cut there is worth nothing, if you play P19 first.  This gives the E19 something safe to run to.
I dont think he needs to respond to that. I was running on time pressure and trying to scare him.  B: I believe you are right, but why take that risk? He's winning by forty points, a throwaway stone to ensure death cost him three at most; that's points well spent.
Mike [14k]: ;)
Hmm, I need to look up some opening with white that better fits me.  As black I prefer to play chinese ...
I don't want to go into the corner
So choose other Joseki
Not joseki move so I chose some response that looked ok
Wasn't sure if g3 works.
You *must* play at h4 or lose the advantage that your 4th line wall will give.
This is a difficult situation for you now. You have two dangerous cutting points. However, given that A already has the influence of your corner stone d4, I think that protecting B is more important.
this leaves him with a lot of options to attack you.
Well I'm not that unhappy so far as I figure his group still needs a few moves to be securly alive.  The problem is, you must stay connected before you can really threaten his group.
Error I guess L6 or M6 ?  Let's look at both  I don't think that either L6 or M6 will work, since they can be cut. I think you must go with M5
This is good, it takes wonderful advantage of you position here.
Not so sure about this .. Lack of strategic plan lets me make this move  I'm not too sure about it either, I've marked some other possiblities for you to consider.
Don't know .. probably more errors in this corner.
Don't run to his stronger side, go towards his weaker corner
never run with the knight's move, it can be cut.
Well he gave my group a little chance here
Trying to prepare cutting of that group and praying opponent will not notice  This is a very good move even if the cut fails, it's very good.
Very good shape
Adding a few liberties
Well, to be honest I didn't have time to read, through the following. I just tried
this move was totally not needed
don't know what I was thinking
Well I managed to get myself killed ... Silly time :-/
well I'm not sure if there isn't some way for black to do severe damage here.
this is very small
I took some time to read there and thought I can avoid a Ko
very good
I think the game is quite close now .. to bad I couldn't play it to the end.
Just a note, I never really know what to do against the chinese opening, so the game turned out really weird.  G: Just play normal. There is nothing dreadful in chineese opening. It has good reputation but would need firm hand to control. Black wants the right side. Give it! :) How about sequence 1-5? Or simply play at 'A' in this position. Later invasion is possible at B.
Was this a mistake? Normally, I would have played something like O17 or N4. I regretted this move immediately. I think if I were to play like this, maybe K4 was better than K16, since black is lower on that side of the board.  G: agreed, i would play on the lower side too. I black playing K4 then following R5 shimari would be ideal with dual extension.
This was unexpected. Here's the beginning to what I feel is a huge game-deciding mistake. I thought this move was a mistake so I wanted to punish it, but I did it wrong. Maybe it would've been different if black didn't have R9. I included that variation that I was expecting.  G: I'm not sure it is cleanly bad for black. In this position White primary mission is not to live in the corner but destroying black's moyo. Considering this, R3 might be an overplay. (Im not sure, ask a pro :))
Since the bottom still looked invadeable, I wanted to capture the two black stones and make a base to attack from. I spent a long time looking at it, but I still misread the situation. Should I have just played P3 instead of R2?  G: Again, white most wanted goal is not to attack the corner but destroying the moyo. If black wants you to play P3 (hurting lower side moyo), do it gladly.
G: strange
I didn't even consider black's response. I thought that he was going to play R7.   G: R7 is ok. Good forcing move to press down black and helps your heavy stones to escape later.
Here, I was seriously thinking of resigning. I had no idea what to play here. I believe the only reason I was able to get back into the game was because my opponent continually made mistakes that I was able to take advantage of.  G: I dont think Black S6 would be such a good move that would force white to resign. Consider that you can live in the corner any time (see var).
I didn't think this would actually work. Unless I'm mistaken, if black had played P8, it would have definately been game over.  G: P8 would have been an overplay here (imho). Building territory and chasing white is the correct behavior.
G: seems to be slow. Now white outside group is safe and will glady live in the corner.
Looking back at the game now, I'm not sure why black even responded and if he were going to, why not at R11?   G: well, Black on the right side is not so strong as it looks at first. After T3 black would be in serious trouble. Even if black can live white will get a great outside influence on the right side what is very good considering your 3 white stones.
G: this sequence is aji keshi. Now white cannot take the corner any more.
Should I have ignored the lower left corner? If so, was this move along the right track? I actually played this move on instinct, not from any reading. I was hoping to use my thickness to make the marked formation uncomfortable, so I could then play something around F4, threatening H3 or J3.  --- G: I wouldnt let the corner die. 'A' is not in danger as long as it has 4 lives, but black can kill the corner with a single move. Making another weak group wont help it much.   At the other side, if white manage to escape (better for w) or live (ok for w) in the corner, black will be in serious trouble. Black has some territory at the lower side but nothing else and the top right corner is weak White controls everything else.
G: Its far not good enough in gote! It would have been much better if you simply play P15 to make a *huge* moyo AND threat black's corner.
Crude/bad move? I was desperate already, hoping to somehow kill or split a part of the potential C7, D7 group and make some territory.   G: "dont touch weak stone". Black wants to live on the left side? Very well then. Build a wall again and control the whole center!  Splitting black groups is essential of course, but black can not connect anyway (d10).
G: That stone is not important.  1, deffend the corner ( keep black weak) 2, chase black
G: DONT reduce your lives if you cannot kill. This move is gote 1 point for black so he wont play it. In the endgame YOU will get it anyway but in case of fighting that single life can decide EVERYTHING.
Maybe unnecessary? I didn't have the time to read it through but I thought maybe I could do something in the corner later.  G: if you leave the corner open, any later invasion around f17 would be serious.
G: yes, separating black is correct.
G: cut if you can cut.
G: E15 for black.
I'm actually surprised that my top left group didn't die. Was it right for black to tenuki here? Should I, as white, have reforced in this bottom corner, around D3 or F6. I didn't play anything because I thought it would be gote.  G: That would have been surprising if you die :) I see a strong white group pressuring weak black here. I hardly think tenuki is correct. Black's upper group will die painly. (And if black tenuki then G7, not cutting.)
G: I wouldnt try to save that stone. Simply kill the upper group (and maybe the corner) and game is won by large margin. If you running here, black will get some stones in the center what can help the fleeing upper group to escape.
Although I lived here somehow, I feel that this was a big mistake on my part. Maybe I should've just given up G5.
This was another move played on pure instinct. I didn't have much hope for it accomplishing anything. It just looked like there was a weakness here somewhere.  G: Maybe. however I dont think White has to kill this group. Simply separate the two (top and middle). One of them will die automagically :-).
Again, the time issue; I didn't really know what to play. I couldn't tell if black's group could live on its own or not. I thought I had a good chance of killing it though, so I wanted to try to prevent it from escaping. I feel that I didn't play the correct moves though. Do you have any insight on the situation?  G: First of all, dont make the center group alive (as you did) The best way of killing to attack multiple groups in the same time.   Next, consider what sente moves black has (N18) and if these are played, is the group still dead. If it is (and it is) try to occupy best shape position. I would play J13.
I have a feeling that I played this sequence here completely wrong. Maybe I should have just played C4?  G: you can even tenuki. Corner is lost, so not important to play here. But you can massacre the top right and the top middle in exchange (as punishment for black's tenuki).
If I had played B5 instead of this or even if I hadn't, can white still kill black's top group and still win?  G: B5 is not good. In case of semai (life and death fight) shape has no priority. Only lives matter. Simply connect at C5 and White has 4 lives, black has 3. End of fighting.
G: Well, I dont think its time to resign.  Despite of white last mistake there is good chanche to win. Consider the following:  * Black can be attacked in sente at 'A'  * Marked black group is virtualy dead. * Group 'B' seems to be dead if white plays first here. * semai in the left side can be won even now (C). * white has single weak group (D) otherways super strong. * .. and white's turn now!  Black has only 60 points in territory. If I have to choose here, I would choose white!  ************** General comments:  doing some corner life and death problems would improve your fighting ability. You should kill what is dead and you should live when you can.  Secondly: You should respect center strength much more. In this game you had tremendous power in the center, and you felt you are losing. Actually you dominated your opponent!
N: strange move, it does not feel like the best to me. I suppose it aims at A, but why not play there right away?  I would like to 'punish' it right away
I'm not comfortable with this move here. I wanted to prevent a B O4, W Q10 exchange because my invading is pathetic, but the outcome with the double kakari was unbearable. However, I do not see a response to White R6 that seems any better. How could I have turned this corner to my advantage?  N: you should not fear the white constuction with q10, it is very fragile. See var. If you are not so agressive, but you want to play a pincer, a high pincer is more relaxed, A or B are nice possibilities I'd prefer A
N: this is a bad shape, a common mistake
N: bad, it seems you don't think flexiblel: each move you should be willing to consider changing your previous plan, this is a way to improve. Here you are too attached to the right side (wich in fact only gets very small)
N: white has a lot of territory and black a bad, cramped shape
N: you should attack
After everything, Black has some influence but cramped shape, while White has at least thirteen points and sente. I'd like to say that I came out better here, but I can't really believe it, especially since White went straight to reducing my influence and settling R14.  N: see previous comments, you are still ahead, but could have done better.
I am conflicted about the R15, Q14 exchange. It has its merits: White has a cramped shape, and Black can defend the corner with S14 (which I did immediately). However, it means I can't really attack White's group anymore, which all but nullifies my thickness on the right side. However, I do not see a better move. What to do here?  N: the exchange is good: cramped shape, in a way you drive blackto your thickness. You might not be happy because you would want r8 at r9, but is the best you can do now. The white group still is not safe, so it can still be attacked.
This seems to be the only real follow-up. Anything else leaves the san-san open and allows White to live comfortably. However, I'm not sure I should have entered into this sequence in the first place...  N: to me it is ok however your thinkink about san-san seems to have a mistake see previous var
This move FEELS right, but I'm not sure how useful it really is. In the end, this stone did not end up doing much. Should I have played elsewhere?  N: if you where attacking (of wich you where not aware?) and defending your corner, you should continue to do so.
Reading is not my strong suit. I connected at P16 out of fear of B O15, W P16, P17, Q17. I was afraid I'd lose the corner, but it turns out I'd probably have been okay. Should I have played O15 instead?  N: this move is logic, it destroys aji.
I played here because I was at an utter loss what to do down here. I cannot play for territory, because my bottom is open and the corner stone is a hoshi, and anything I try to do to take what little I can get on the bottom will allow White to counter my influence in the center. However, this gives White the territory he needs to catch up. What should I have done here?  N: i find it difficult too, to suggest a good move, this is the result of your play at the marked stone, wich created a bad shape and as a consequence less possibilities for good moves. Your move should be playable, i would be tempted to play tenuki because white does not have such a good follow up i think.
N: the corner is big for both and you have a follow-up
White strikes at an opening in my shape. What I know of Go tells me that this play is unreasonable and that I should have at least profited from this invasion where I was stronger, and possibly should have killed this. However, I got nothing out of the fighting that ensued... what did I do wrong?  N: here you should have read a bit, recognised the most agressive move and seen that white has (too) little space to live. Confidence in lifa and death problems can help you a lot of course.
I didn't want him to take J11, but if I took it myself, he'd take F12 himself and the attack would be over with nothing left to show for it. At least, that's how I see this position. Was this a mistake?  N: it seems that this move is best, f11 is a key point for shape, but this is a keypoint for attack and defence, it gives breethingspace for the black group, attacks white and creates future options like A or B to split white.
I thought that I could create two weak groups by cutting here, but both lived and destroyed my influence. Should I have withdrawn instead at L11? Or would the cut at H11 been more profitable?  N: i don't think this is the mistake.
Shoot. The simple connection at M13 would have fared me better, wouldn't it?  N: yes better shape,
Okay, I still think I sould have had the upper hand in this position. White is horribly surrounded, but I cannot help but think that this should have been R9 instead.  N: this move is logic.
Would P8 have been better? I have read out that White has chances to escape thanks to the weakness of the J10 and H9 stones, but I can probably still kill and I cannot allow White to capture the right like he did.  N: P8 looks a lot better.
Was this response really forced? In the game, I didn't see the danger to my three stones (though I suppose it is really obvious, but even now, I cannot see how Black can allow O7.  N: looks like this was your last chance.
I wanted to kill White's dragon now that one of my victims had survived, but looking at this now, Black looks awfully thin to pull the kill off. Is there any way I could have strengthened my position by threatening the left side and then successfully killed White's top?  N: i feel white is slightly ahead here. I can't see a clear shot here. To me you missed your 'easy' chances earlier.
I had a hard time deciding between E13 and G13. I have no knowledge that would lead me to think one better than the other, so I tried reading. I (mis)read that Black could stay connected by playing here. Would E13 have worked, or is it time to try to salvage what I can by abandoning the attack?  N: blocking at the ouside feels normal to me. However here it does not seem to work either. this is the last comment.
This was just a last-ditch effort to try to catch up. By failing to kill something, I've lost all that I'd invested in influence, and I needed to try something drastic to make some points.
I resigned here.  Thanks for reviewing the game. I hope you have some insight to help me get out of my rut ^_^
(2) -> hi
*: Some what ackward with black stones at 4,4 (D16) and 4,16 (A16).  *: Marked "X" would be more normal, nothing terribly wrong, experimenting is a good thing, lets see what happens :).
*: Hmm I don't know if I like whites move here, the feeling is he doesn't want to let black get all the right side.  But whites future on that side is somewhat limited.  *: Looking at pro games that pattern showed up total of 23 times on GoBase.org, at different times.  (Just the corner).  *: And if I take the entire right side into account it shows up ONLY ONCE.  In that case please look at the attached example on how to proceed.
*: Ohh that probably hurt you, as it helps white.  You attach to defend not attack.  *: So here neither side is too strong or weak, so why not attack like in the example.
.
*: Proverb, "Never push the cart from behind".  Meaning if you pushing white on from behind like with 6/7, 8/9.  You are just encourging white to take the lead.  *: Shape move is 13,17 (R7).
*: White should HANE 10,16 (Q10) to get off the 3rd line.
*: Your scared white is going to take the entire bottom?  If so why help him?  You are asking for P4 onces white has few more stones there it will make it really hard to invade.   *: If you are worry about the safty of your group start with 13,17 (R7) as it is the Eye shape point.
*: ................ What is this?  Common you have to fight #12, i would recommend 15,17 (R5). Please look at both examples.
*: You just finish playing 4 moves with ZERO VALUE!!!!!!  *: Your are making a great wall that has been neturalized by 16,10 (K4) before it came into existance.  *: Second comment moves like #19 - 18,15 (P2) are called End-Game moves, you playing that doesn't get you anything doesn't hurt white at all, he can take the sente and even hurt your wall more with 10,16 (Q10) now.
*: No need.
*: GOOD! Stop white.
*: GAH! Enough with the empty triangles, (X) this is refered to as empty triangle.  The only good move here is 10,18 (S10).
*: And this will accomplish what?  This is called early x-mas present.  And since X-mas already passed we'll call it early birthday present.  White wants to defefend his weakness at 13,17 (R7) why help him do it?  What did you expect he will answer at 12,19 (T8) so you can take advantage of him?  *: You got to play the best possible move on the board and not the one that looks easy.
*: What the heck?  this doesn't even give you a base, missclick maybe?  I think 17,12 (M3) is the base move here not that you need it yet.  *: Better move 3,15 (C6) stop white from making a huge moyo.
*: ???? Meaning less?  Maybe trying to threaten 10,16 (Q10).   If white is going to threaten a cut like that, might as well CUT!!
*: Right idea, but wrong move.  Needs to be 15,5 (O15).
*: Again pushing the cart from behind, you are felling behind fast here.
*: Why???? What does this do, why not 10,3 (K17).  Why not take few more free points, or start a fight at 12,4 (M16).  This move is really a bad use of a stone, not wasted, but the most inefficeint use of the stone.
*: ?????
*: GOOD!
*: Whats with angle moves?  Only right move here is 4,3 (D17). Please look at example.
*: Nice idea, but wrong direct of attack, you want to attack in a such a way that it helps you not hinders you.  *: By playing that you are asking to be split at 4,8 (G16). Please look at example.
*: KAB000M!
*: What the who?  If white played 4,7 (G16), why he didn't follow through with it, next move should be 5,15 (H15). Please look at example.
*: right idea, but spot.  5,8 (H15) is the proper move.
*: Slight Overplay.
*: Good :).
*: Oopps ... i guess that is a bit annoying to the right hand group but.  6,1 (F19) is more dangerous.  Please look at example.
*: ohh silly mistake 6,1 (F19) is where the game is at.
*: uhhh? What is that for?  your group on the inside is weak if you are going to do anything make a shape move at 14,6 (O14). Please look at example.
*: That hurts, a bit .. now if you placed #71 at 14,6 (O14) you wouldn't have to work soo much. Please look at example.
*: I know it's tempting to save the heavier group, 2 stones worth more then 1 stone right?  But in this case that one stone on the top is worth alot more then the 2 stones you just saved.  *: You playing this (assuming white does the correct move at 17,2 (R18)..  You saved 2 stones, and made zero points, and took away 4 points from white.  And on top gave white 15 points.  So you playing gave white 11 Points in total.  Now if you played 17,2 (R18) ...
*: This hurts.  I see black won by resign, right now this game is in whites favor, so white must have made some serious mistakes.
*: Why?  If white is worried about the weakness at 18,2 (S18), why not eliminate it right away by taking out the cutting stones at 15,2 (P18)?
*:Over play, whites group is in trouble at 11,2 (L18).  White has to take care of the black cutting stones above first.  Blacks next move can kill the entire group.
*: ................................... Way off side. Please look at example.
*: uhmm you just lost all your stones. Correct move was 15,6 (P14).
*: ?? 16,6 (Q15) Please look at example. White's first Big mistake, worth 30 points.
*: White gets a safty, wrong direction.  HAS TO BE 15,6 (P14) or 16,5 (Q15).
*: White misses the safty... and gives black an early birthday present.
*: Second 30 point mistake by white.
*: Why? Doesn't do any thing, another mistake.  Gave black free move. To kill him :(, correct move is 12,2 (M18).  *: Might the game losing move.
*: Very Good.
*: It's too late.
*: Fishing.
*: Game move, worth 40 points.
*: My teacher always told me if you are going to threaten a cut .. CUT directly.
*: White has lost all hope and is playing random in hopes black will make mistake.  I'll continue but will only point out major blunders ...
*: Doesn't work when you have a weakness
*: Wrong shape. X is the right shape.
*: Might as well go for 3,3 instead of just touching it.
*: Black is in lots of troulbe here with the marked group. Lets see if white attacks it properly
*: Mistake you are just taking away your own liberties, always attack from outside.
*: Mistake. after 5,6 (E14) Black killed his group. Please look at example.  *: Black should save that stone, should save his group.
*: Overview ....  This was a very interseting game, even though I would normally say don't send games for review that you won.  In this game I think we have an expection because there are soo many coin flips in this game its any ones game.  Few things to consider:  1) You seriously need to consider shapes when making move decissions, right now there is no shape move in the game so it hurts the development of the game.  I recommend Shape Up! on GoBase.org or Making Good Sahpes by Bozulich.  2) Direct of play was wrong in few places, when attack attack from your strong groups towards strong groups.   If you have weak groups on the board first fix your weakness before going for your oponnents weakness.  3) You pretty much followed white around the board until white lost the top group, play your own game stop felling into someone elses rythm.  4) Walls are strong attacking bases, but they are useless if they are counter stones in place like on the bootm.  I hope this review helps, feel free to mail me if you any questions.
Emp: this move rids the possibility of 3-3 for w, not recommended for this situation and timing.
I am interested in the timing of R6 invasion. Is it a good idea at all with R12 having so much aji? If it is, when should it be played?  Emp: i like the way you thought, u showed some sophistication there. consider w has got K4 to limit b's moyo, R6 invasion has became of little value. to make it simple, u can consider b can go S8 anytime for free, that makes R6 invasion even more trivial. to me, R3,S4 looks more appealing in the future.   K4 is a good move.
Emp: wrong direction for b.
Here was the first point at which I was confused. I don't know how to handle K4, and the play in the game was very bad. Maybe J3 here?  Emp: w should be pretty contented with K4 actually.  1) H3 was an unbearablely narrow extension for b, it's the value of K4. 2) b's got no lethal attacking moves for K4  3) K4 got access to the center and O3, no panic is necessary now.
Emp: interesting move, but unless w got a cool grand strategy, move like this is hard to play.
Emp: b should go for B18, it's bigger than it seems.
Emp: b is helping w to secure points. w is leading.
I was very happy with this  Emp: w should go for J5 instead, just to keep pressure for b's group, b should go K5 now, nothing for w.
This seems like a bad idea  Emp: ya, because of R12, w isn't so strong there, and b got a wall with G15, apparently an overplay.
Emp: b hasn't made any use of R12, so w is doing well.
Emp: no point to ko for w.
Emp: b lost sente for nothing, b should go J13 for sente.
Emp: w should go for G7 now, even so, F12 still makes it hard for w to fight .
Emp: w got nothing in this fight
Emp: huge loss for w
Emp: strange move
Misread
Here I resigned  Emp: w had been doing fine or even better than b before the death on the right side and huge mis on the left. for us amatuers, the level of our playing depends more on the severeness of our mistakes rather than the greatness of our good moves. w really needs to work on how to avoid low level mistakes. b needs to learn how to be a shark, bite as soon as seeing blood:)
om3: here i was not sure...  This is a very peculiar move... Usually if W wants to emphasize the left side, she would play the variation below....  By playing this variation W gives up more in the corner, and fails to properly enclose black.
This is fine. You still come out ahead as compared to if W had simply played C4 instead of this half-hearted variant.
You leave in sente and W's stones at h5 don't threaten much. Take note when your opponent plays like this, however. It means influence is going to be very important to them. You can't keep your head down and ignore the center when move 16 gives major local loss in order to get some center strength.
I don't think this corner play, which is emphasizing the right, is the most important area for you.   If you already had R4 and played P3 it would be different, but already having P3 I may suggest an approach elsewhere. H3 does not effectively attack P3 and B can always slide to M3, hurting H3's expandibility, later.   Any of the marked areas I would recommend more.
om3: probably too close?  Not as much "Too close" as I'm not sure it's the right direction... I'd favor any of the marked moves more
This feels a little too aggressive... Perhaps L16 instead, to help with attacks at or around Q13
om3: probably i should react here?  Reacting topside would favor you better. By ignoring an approach to your open skirt you end up in a very weak position, particularly with such a long extension.
Each move here makes it harder and harder for K16. Don't push this way unless you either have no plans to save K16 or have already saved them. By trying to save what should be dead stones you invite a lot of trouble
om3: too heavy?
om3: a mistake?
om3: desperate tries... probably the game is lost now for b... do you see any serious chance left? the rest of the game is not so interesting, probably..
From this point on it feels like you're thrashing. Just playing wild moves in the hopes that something would work, but not striking at any particular aji more complicated than a glance.
guerecon [3k]: :)
om3 [4k]: not too fun, actually guerecon [3k]: I think its over   More thrashing. The ladder wipes time information from the game, but usually when I see play like this, I see 2-3 seconds a move.
This doesn't work for you.... The variation is more promising
guerecon [3k]: good try om3 [4k]: yea om3 [4k]: i think youre right om3 [4k]: not much fun anymore for me :-) guerecon [3k]: P13 was your mistake I think om3 [4k]: thanks
Sasscho [23k]: same to you
> This move is "backwards"; let me explain.  First, it is wiser (especially as a beginning player) to open at least one corner on the 4-4 points.  With your moves 2 and 4, you opened on 3-4 points, which makes it harder to enclose a large corner area. That immediately puts you at a disadvantage.  If you had played 2 at A and 6 at B, you would have a better shape because it's wider in the corner and narrower on the side.  This is what black did with moves 1 and 5 in the opposite corner (although I think black 5 would have been better at C to prevent your enclosing the lower-right corner).  You should study some basic joseki to achieve more equality in the openings and put this into practice.
>Again, a "backwards" move.  If you had played 4 at A or B and 8 at C or D, it would be much better.  Also, because of the bad shape made by your moves 2 and 6, please notice that black 7 threatens those two stones.  This is somewhat typical of 3-4 openings, and you played two of them.
>I would consider playing at A to consolidate your lower left corner.  That is a sente move, meaning black has to respond (by playing at B, for example).  After black moves, then you can do something in the upper left corner.  Your move was all right but you could also have considered playing a D.  That supports the corner more, where your move supports the side.  Generally corners are more important because you can make larger territories with fewer stones in the corners.  Also, if you don't play at D, black should!
>White should play at A (sente), then follow at B as previously described.  The left side may eventually become important (or maybe not!), but the corners are important now.
At this point I thought I have a good chance to hold the whole left side.  >Let's reconsider that: 1. Left side isn't that important 2. You are leaving black the whole right side, because you haven't played there 3. Black can follow with additional stones near 17 either to start a fight or to reduce your left-side territory (variation).
A
>Your move 26 doesn't do enough now.  Pushing into the center is a good idea LATER, after you lay claim to corners and sides. Also, I still like moves A and B as commented earlier.  You could also play at C on the right side.  Please note that by playing at D black can capture your 22 stone, but doesn't need to do that now because he still has bigger threats.
>A would still be better.  Then is black plays where you played 30, you can close at B.  Black will be safe in the lower left corner but only with small territory.
>It's important to play at A.  If you don't do this, black has a nasty cutting point at B.
>That's the cutting point I warned about.
>Good.  That was a necessary defense.  Black's 31 stone is effectively isolated and dead.  White is slightly ahead.
>Should have been at A, which is black's next and lethal move. Remember the proverb, "Opponent's best move is usually my best move."
Have not seen this. At whicht stage could I have prevented it?  >First, protect the cutting point black used.  Also you created a vulnerability by skipping a point between moves 40 and 42, where a solid connection might have been safer.  Now black has a significant lead.  How is this possible?  Not simply because black captured some white stones.  More importantly, black can use his living area to push out into the center.  I think white now needs to strengthen the lower right corner (A) and play along the right side also (such as either B).  And don't forget the upper left (C).  If you think that's too many things to do at once, you're right.  Go can be like that when your situation deteriorates quickly.  It's important to prevent that.  Wise and cautious play has that objective.
I tried to prevent black fom forming a living group but...  >Don't worry about that too much; it's a small territory.  Your stones had "bad shape", which allowed black to make threatening moves like 67 and 69.  He then used this initiative to make eyespace for his own stones, which was smart.  You will not win every battle or stop every invasion; neither can he.
>Wasted move.  What did you expect black to do, other than capture? This kind of move is only useful as a ko threat.
...I must have make a mistake, or haven't I?
>Notice now that black can play at A and kill your 70-72 stones. That deprives you of the possibility to use them as a foundation for expanding upwards along the right side.
>Wrong direction.  I would recommend A.  Black would probably reply at B, then you play C, black D, etc.  See variation.
>Why did black do this instead of capturing at A???  Stupid!
I make a mistake at some stage here but I do not know what the mistake is.
>The corner move at A is much, much bigger.  See variation.
I think that was not the best move, or?  >Absolutely not.  Playing in the corner would be better, for sure.   Black was able to capture some of your stones here because you didn't make solid connections.  You need to think about that.
Here I get often conused how to best secure a living group.
>This is OK because it is sente (black must respond).  But immediately you should play at A to make life for the upper right corner where you invaded.
>Playing 128 at A might be better.   But still you have B in the upper left corner, which is bigger.
>This gives you a false sense of security.  The formation looks solid and you might think that all the X's represent potential white territory.  But black can extend from his 129 stone and wipe that out.  See variation.
>You did not need to play here yet.  If black plays there, you can easily capture.   However, once black plays at A it is vital for you to play a white stone at 142.
Sasscho [23k]: for long have you been playing?
Acinonyx [?]: but it is just matter of keep playing Acinonyx [?]: about a year now Sasscho [23k]: oh Acinonyx [?]: but dont think i have played a lot
Acinonyx [?]: about ayear i learnede the rules
Sasscho [23k]: I have lost nearly all of my games
>You did not have to play at 160.  It is more important to play at A for a move in this area.  However, what is even more vital is to play at B to make life in the upper right corner.  I should have stressed this in previous comments.
>A is better in this area.  Still, don't forget to make life in the upper right corner!
>This doesn't buy you anything, though might be useful as a ko threat if you were in a ko fight.  Any of the X's would be better moves.
At least I try soemthing but this is probably a waste of stones?  >Yes, because you could still play profitably at any of the X's.
>Better at A, because you would thereby make two eyespace points and reduce black's territory here.  Notice that after black's next move (at A) he makes territory along the bottom.  This is a difference of about 4 points: two points of territory you could have made plus two more that black did.  However, the upper right is STILL vulnerable and needs to be protected with B.
>Black didn't have to do this, at least not yet.  You could gain one point here by playing at A.  This is a typical endgame move.  However, you are not at the endgame yet.  You can still save the upper right corner with B and make points on the side with C and deprive black with an eye with D, which is also a sente move.  AFTER you play B, you can think about playing E.  But if you do that now, black will kill the upper right corner by playing at B himself.  Remember the proverb, "Opponent's move is usually my best move."
>Pointless.  You cannot make life or territory here, or threaten black.
This came only to mind becasue my opponent gave me a hint.Would I have lost the group otherwide?  >Yes, as commented.
>Black did not have to do this.
>A is better, see variation.
>Black didn't have to do this.  White has no threats here; you are wasting your moves.
>Mistake for black in that A would make him one more point of eye space.
>Better to play at A now, because when black later forces you to play at B you have to fill one point of your territory.
